---
title: A few things I learned about us after Boston
contributors: ["contributor/emil-guillermo.md"]
#layout: layouts/post.njk
date: 2013-04-26T01:15:49+00:00
tags:
- bombings
- Boston marathon
- Tsarnaev brothers

---

![dzhokhar-tsarnaev.jpg](/uploads/dzhokhar-tsarnaev.jpg)

This was the dark-skinned suspect that turned the world upside down last week.

As the media takes its time to catch its breath after the coverage of the Boston
blasts, it’s interesting to review how race played a major part in coverage from
the very beginning.

I mean, really, how did we get that first description of a “dark-skinned
suspect”?

The main source was John King of CNN, who said on April 17:

“I want to be very careful about this because people get very sensitive when you
say these things. I was told by one of these sources, who is a law enforcement
official, that this was a dark-skinned male.”

Of course, he’s since tweeted a clarification, but not really an apology.

King admitted he got it wrong, sort of, and that “the source of that description
was a senior government official. And I asked, are you sure?”

In his own defense, King wrote: “But I’m responsible. What I am not is racist.”

Maybe not, but King “got played” by someone. And like others in his viewing
audience, I trusted him.

When I first heard it reported on CNN, I tweeted this out:

> Relax all u white terrorists: They’re looking for someone w/dark skin, accent,
> and black t-shirt. Police work courtesy of #ProfilesAreUs — _Emil Guillermo
> @emilamok 15 Apr_

A few days later when the first surveillance videos and photos were made public,
and the suspects weren’t dark-skinned at all, I tweeted:

> How do xenophobes feel about #Bostonsuspects who look like avg American  guys
> w/ball caps&backpacks? How do you profile Blurry-Americans? — _Emil Guillermo
> @emilamok 18 Apr_

To me, I couldn’t tell who the suspects were, or where they were from. Is there
a small country somewhere called “Blur?”

Perhaps the media’s mantra of Back Bay should have been a paraphrase of the
famous battle cry of nearby Bunker Hill: “Don’t fire until you see the whites of
their skin.”

If they had, the media would have gotten that part of the story right.

Perhaps John King shouldn’t feel so bad.

One Dallas station actually [identified][1] “New Girl” star Zooey Deschanel as a
bombing suspect.

No harm, no foul?

Maybe. But then there was Sunil Tripathi, a Brown University student, missing
since March 16. Last week, he was wrongly identified as the Boston bomber. His
body was [found][2] just today.

_WHITE PRIVILEGE ON DISPLAY_

The knee-jerk reaction of “terrorism=dark-skinned Muslim” does expose our
unhealthy attitude about white privilege.

We still honor it. Especially when “bad things happen.” Does the perp always
have to be a “dark person”? Must whites always get a pass, especially when it
comes to terrorism?

In that sense, the brothers Tsarnaev have challenged the dominant cultural
assumption.

But really, have we not seen enough pathological behavior from whites to grant
them at least some bad-guy equality? Doesn’t one Charles Manson count for at
least several hundred thousand dark-skinned thugs?

Manson, not enough?

Then how about John Wayne Gacy, Jeffrey Dahmer, Buford O. Furrow?

They appear to have misused their cultural passport of Whiteness.

People of color go through life without that skin color visa. They can make up
for it in other ways. Like getting a good education, sustaining a decent career,
living a good and decent life that gains them entry into the broad American
middle class and beyond.

But for the Tsarnaevs, their whiteness wasn’t enough. And their experience of
struggle in America is really more like many Asian immigrants than you’d think.

_MORE LIKE DZHOKHAR THAN WE ADMIT?_

It should elicit a little sympathy for the brothers. A friend of mine wrote a
[piece][3] called “I am not the Tsarneavs.”

OK, sure. The Tsarnaevs don’t speak for or represent all Muslims. But they do
share something with many of us from immigrant communities. They were legal
immigrants who came to America and were simply looking to find their place in
the world. And at least when it came to Dzhokhar, the younger surviving brother,
there was a real yearning to understand his past.

When Dzhokhar was 16 and assigned to write an essay on something he was
passionate about, he chose Chechnya, his ancestral homeland, according to a
report in _The New York_ _Times_.

And then he wrote to Brian Glyn Williams, a professor at U.Mass Dartmouth, who
said Dzhokar “wanted to know more about his Chechen roots.”

He wanted to be grounded and find out more about the wars raged by Russia that
killed 200,000 Chechen rebels.

He was a kid in America hungry for knowledge.

It reminded me of my days when I lived not far from what would be Tsarnaevs’
neighborhood  in Cambridge. As an off-campus student, being Filipino at Harvard
in the ’70s was not much different from being a Chechen in the U.S. I used to
joke about majoring in alienation. I just wasn’t white like he was.

Like Dzhokhar, the route I found to a sense of self was history. It’s the call
of ethnic studies. When I heard it, the only books on Filipino immigration to
the U.S. back then were unpublished theses in Widener Library.

But I admit I had a big advantage over young Dzhokhar.

I wasn’t influenced by a radicalized older brother.

_THROWING THE BOOK AT HIM_

The most surprising conversation I had about Dzhokhar this week was with a
long-time friend, who was all over me before I could say “Miranda rights.”

“Miranda?” he said, “Are you kidding? They should throw the book at him. Better
yet, maybe the book is too good.”

My friend was all for Dzhokhar being treated as an enemy combatant. That would
get him some kind of Dick Cheney treatment. And I don’t mean a quail hunting
trip.

But the truth is, they didn’t need to charge him with that.

“They could get all kinds of information from him,” my friend insisted.

“You mean you don’t want to take the time to let a judge and jury decide, like
they do in a strong democracy?” I asked.

“Why,” asked my friend. “We saw it all on TV.”

My friend is no legal expert. He’s a regular guy, the kind who would make up
what I’d call a “joop”–“jury of one’s peers.”

He’s a well- educated, high-earning professional. And the thought of Dzhokhar
made him agitated and incensed like I’ve never heard.

An extreme sense of patriotism? Or reverse xenophobia? Reverse Islamic zealotry?

You see, my friend is also an immigrant, a naturalized citizen from a continent
known for its dictatorships and lack of freedom.

If you have had similar conversations yourself, we all must remember that we are
still a great country–of laws.

And that democracy will prevail only if we can show the world that a person like
Dzhokhar Tsarnaev deserves justice.

People like my friend, who want to string him up now, should remember that
Tsarnaev was willing to die when he set off the bombs.

Indeed, we should give him what a free country affords, a fair trial.

And then we should resist giving him what he wants–a death that will inspire
other violent radicals.

[1]: https://www.tvweek.com/blogs/tvbizwire/2013/04/zooey-deschanel-receives-apolo.php

[2]: https://www.alternet.org/media/medical-examiners-confirm-death-missing-brown-student-misidentified-boston-bomber?akid=10364.4407.GVL268&rd=1&src=newsletter830672&t=3

[3]: https://www.salon.com/2013/04/22/i_am_not_the_tsarnaevs/
