---
title: Arizona’s Anti-Immigrant School Policy – Education Week
authors: []
#layout: layouts/post.njk
date: 2010-07-02T11:42:54+0000
related_programs: []
link_to_original: ''
images: []

---
Commentary by Khin Mai Aung

The much-publicized Arizona legislation known as SB 1070, a criminal statute
allowing local law enforcement to demand proof of immigration status based on
“reasonable suspicion,” is disturbing and xenophobic. It is a particularly
heavy-handed development in a state where unprecedented anti-immigrant sentiment
has festered for years. The immigration-related aspects of this backlash have
justifiably garnered considerable public attention.

But the state has pursued similarly draconian policies in other arenas, one of
them education. This spring, the Arizona Department of Education issued
citations to several school districts throughout the state for hiring teachers
who speak English with a Spanish accent.

As a civil rights lawyer who advocates for immigrants and low-income students of
color in public education, I am alarmed by this development. Several years ago,
I represented three Massachusetts teachers fired on the basis of faulty and
discriminatory English-fluency tests. My clients were veteran math and science
teachers born in Cambodia and Puerto Rico who taught successfully for years in
Massachusetts. After years of litigation, we won the case, with full back pay
and benefits. My clients have resumed doing what they do best-serving immigrant
and refugee students in their community.

The recent Arizona teacher citations-based on an expansive interpretation of the
federal No Child Left Behind Act-require the districts to submit plans for
corrective action, such as accent-reduction training, and could culminate in
reassignment or dismissal. So far, it is not clear what standards of fluency
Arizona is using, or how those standards are being applied. My clients’
experiences in Massachusetts have revealed that this is a dangerous road to
tread.

This is not the first time Arizona has cracked down on immigrant and
English-language-learner students in its public education system. Just this
spring, it passed a state education law intended to eliminate ethnic studies in
public schools, and Arizona’s efforts to override English-language learners’
federal right to an equal education have been litigated before the U.S. Supreme
Court. In that case, Horne v. Flores, the state department of education pursued
yet another novel and overly broad interpretation of the No Child Left Behind
Act, arguing that it had eviscerated English-language-learner protections in the
Equal Educational Opportunities Act of 1974. Fortunately, the court decided the
case on other grounds, leaving intact the EEOA.

Now, reports have surfaced that undocumented families fearful of Senate Bill
1070 are withdrawing their children from Arizona public schools, despite
long-standing and undisputed U.S. Supreme Court precedent that undocumented
children may attend public schools. Furthermore, SB 1070 and Arizona’s current
education policies marginalize all immigrants-regardless of immigration
status-and make them feel unwelcome.

What Arizona and other states really need are education policies that welcome
all students, and make them feel included and valued. Our schools are becoming
increasingly diverse, and need appropriate staffing and resources to adequately
serve their pupils. To be effective, teachers must connect with their students.
Schools should be commended-not disciplined-for hiring and retaining staff
members who understand their students’ cultures. Experienced, credentialed
teachers with good track records at teaching English-language learners should
not be singled out because they speak accented English. This is especially true
in a state like Arizona, which faces a severe teacher shortage.

Schools must also provide professional development for all teachers-including
training in English-language-learner teaching methods and cultural awareness.
Moreover, schools with large English-language-learner populations should have
teaching materials tailored to these students’ needs. Arizona’s students would
be better served by improving efforts to bolster teacher training and retention,
and making sure schools have appropriate course materials, rather than spending
precious resources on questioning the English skills of proven teachers.

Khin Mai Aung is a lawyer and the director of the Educational Equity and Youth
Rights Project at the Asian American Legal Defense and Education Fund, based in
New York City.

<https://www.edweek.org/ew/articles/2010/07/02/36aung.h29.html>