---
title: Asian American Groups File Brief Against PA’s Discriminatory Voter ID Law
authors: []
#layout: layouts/post.njk
date: 2013-08-30T14:57:58+0000
related_programs: []
link_to_original: ''
images: []

---
August 30, 2013 — The Asian American Legal Defense and Education Fund (AALDEF)
and the Asian Pacific American Bar Association (APABA) of Pennsylvania filed an
_amicus_ “friend of the court” brief in the Pennsylvania State Supreme Court
challenging the constitutionality of Pennsylvania’s restrictive voter ID
requirement in _Applewhite v. Pennsylvania_. The _amicus_ brief was prepared by
AALDEF and pro-bono counsel White & Case LLP based on findings from AALDEF’s
election monitoring data from the 2012 and prior elections.

“Pennsylvania’s voter ID law, which targets naturalized citizens and limited
English proficient Americans, disenfranchises Asian Americans at a
disproportionately high rate,” said Glenn Magpantay, Director of the Democracy
Program at AALDEF. “Moreover, Asian Americans have been left out of state
efforts to educate the public about the new voting laws. Pennsylvania has made
it apparent that it is unable to apply this restrictive law equally to all
voters. As voting is our most fundamental right, the Court must strike down this
law.”

Under the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania’s voter ID law, all eligible voters must
present government-issued photo identification in order to vote. AALDEF’s
_amicus_ brief demonstrates that this law provides poll workers with unbridled
discretion and unclear standards, which will continue to lead to overt or
implicit discrimination against Asian Americans at the polls.

In the 2012 general election, even though poll workers were permitted to ask all
voters for identification, the percentage of Asian American voters that were
required to show ID was disproportionately higher. For example, according to
AALDEF’s poll monitoring, 26 out of 52 respondents (50%) in Philadelphia and 21
out of 30 (70%) of respondents in Upper Darby were required to show ID, even
though they were not first-time voters.

AALDEF’s _amicus_ brief further contends that the Commonwealth has made no
significant attempt to provide Asian American citizens of limited English
proficiency with information about the new voting law. In 2012, 53% of Asian
Americans voters polled in Pennsylvania spoke English less than “very well,”
compared to 37% of all Asian Americans nationally. Nonetheless, the
Commonwealth’s efforts to educate limited English proficient voters have thus
far been insufficient. As a result, there is a signficant possibility that these
citizens will not have their votes counted.

Finally, AALDEF’s _amicus_ brief contends that the voter identification
requirements make it disproportionately burdensome for naturalized citizens to
obtain valid photo IDs prior to an election day. Under PA’s new voter ID law,
naturalized citizens who are not possession of their naturalization certificates
(either because they were lost, damaged, or stolen) may be prevented from
voting, given the length of time and cost required to obtain a replacement
certificate from the federal immigration authorities.

“Asian Americans voters in Pennsylvania remain adversely impacted by PA’s
restrictive Voter ID law,” said Tsiwen Law, Local Counsel to APABA-PA.
“Thousands of Asian American voters have not applied for the Commonwealth’s
voter-only ID in the mistaken belief that the documents they have will be
accepted at the polls. The Commonwealth has done little to educate voters with
limited English proficiency. As a result, Asian American voters hold the fewest
Pennsylvania Voter-only ID cards. With the Commonwealth unwillling to undertake
the massive education needed to insure that voters can exercise their
constitutionally protected right to vote, the correct solution is for the
Commonwealth Court to permanently enjoin the PA Voter ID Law.”

[Download the brief >>](https://click.icptrack.com/icp/relay.php?r=&msgid=4716609&act=11111&c=23535&destination=http%3A%2F%2Faaldef.org%2FAALDEF%2520Amicus%2520Brief%2520Applewhite.pdf)

**Contact:**

Ujala Sehgal 212.966.5932 ex.217
[usehgal@aaldef.org](mailto:usehgal@aaldef.org)