---
title: Asian American Civil Rights Groups Ask Government To Reveal How It Targets Individuals from “Special Interest Countries”
authors: ["staff/rob.md"]

#layout: layouts/post.njk
date: 2010-01-15T10:52:39+00:00


---

Two prominent Asian American civil rights organizations today asked the federal
government to reveal how Customs and Border Protection agents may single out
individuals at the border based solely on their national origin. The Asian Law
Caucus (ALC), based in San Francisco, and the Asian American Legal Defense Fund
(AALDEF), based in New York, issued a Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) Request
to understand how immigration authorities’ internal lists designating
individuals from “special interest countries” may be used to stop innocent
citizens and non-citizens for indiscriminate searches and questioning.

“Subjecting individuals from certain countries to extensive searches and
interrogations without any cause or specific intelligence information is
tantamount to racial profiling. We are concerned that the civil rights of
thousands of travelers are being violated because of a government policy on
‘special interest countries.’ The American public deserves to know what the
policy is and how it is being used,” said Veena Dubal, a staff attorney at the
Asian Law Caucus in San Francisco.

Over the past four years, ALC and AALDEF have received numerous inquiries from
U.S. citizens and residents regarding CBP interviews and searches at U.S. ports
of entry. Many individuals have expressed concerns related to lengthy secondary
inspections, searches, and interviews including questioning about lawful
religious and political activities. These concerns have been primarily reported
by Muslim, Arab or South Asian individuals who feel that they may be targeted as
a result of their nationality or ethnicity. On March 4, 2008, the McClatchy
Newspaper disclosed a February 2006 ICE memo which reported federal agencies’
use of internal lists of “special interest countries” for national security
reasons. The article further disclosed that an individual designated as a
“special interest alien” would be subject to a “full court press” of interviews,
inspections and database checks.

Sameer Ahmed, a Skadden Fellow at AALDEF, reiterated the importance of
government transparency on this issue. “The Obama Administration claims to have
committed itself to an unprecedented level of openness while also distancing
itself from the discriminatory post-9/11 policies of the Bush Administration,”
Ahmed said. “Only by releasing the requested information will the public know
for certain that the government is making good on its promises.”

[Read the FOIA request](/uploads/pdf/ICE-CBP.FOIA.pdf)

The Asian American Legal Defense and Education Fund (AALDEF), founded in 1974,
is a national organization that protects and promotes the civil rights of Asian
Americans. By combining litigation, advocacy, education, and organizing, AALDEF
works with Asian American communities across the country to secure human rights
for all.
