---
title: Asian students praised for role in 2 Philly school settlements – Philadelphia
  Inquirer
authors: []
#layout: layouts/post.njk
date: 2010-12-21T21:43:07+0000
related_programs: []
link_to_original: ''
images: []

---
by Jeff Gammage

Much of the credit for two landmark settlements to battle racial bias, Chairman
Stephen Glassman told spectators at the state Human Relations Commission meeting
on Monday, goes to people who weren’t in the room:

Asian students at South Philadelphia High School.

It was the quiet power of their stories, born of violence and harassment, and
their “extraordinary courage” and “guts” in coming forward that led officials to
act decisively.

Once the students described how they were abused at school, “we knew we had to
do something,” Commissioner M. Joel Bolstein said.

The meeting was during school hours, so no students were present. But for an
hour, the commissioners, staff, community advocates, and city school officials
praised two nearly identical settlements announced Wednesday. The School
District settled complaints filed with the commission and the federal government
stemming from violence on Dec. 3, 2009, when 30 Asian students were attacked by
groups of mostly African American classmates.

The settlements mandate broad changes in how the district handles complaints of
harassment and violence.

“I’m glad we came to a settlement, but the work is just beginning,” School
Superintendent Arlene Ackerman said after addressing the commission. “We have a
lot of work to do.”

It would be easy to read the federal settlement and conclude that it was 30
pages of legalese. In fact, line after line speaks directly to specific cases of
anti-Asian harassment – none more loudly than that involving a Vietnamese
immigrant student, Hao Luu.

His name is never mentioned, but provisions for translators and parental
notifications help address what befell him in a case that began in accusation
and ended with the district admitting its error.

“I think my situation might have had some effect, a little,” Luu, now 18 and
attending a different school, said during an interview.

Luu said he was glad the school had improved under a new principal, Otis
Hackney, but said his harsh experience altered his life and disrupted his
education.

The day before the violence erupted, Luu was followed after school by 10 to 15
students and beaten so badly that he vomited. The next morning, his grandmother
Suong Nguyen went to the school and filed an incident report.

Neither she nor Luu was contacted by school administrators. Instead of being
treated as a victim, Luu was accused as a perpetrator. During the next two
months, he was ordered transferred from the school, despite having won his case
at a disciplinary hearing, and accused of being a gang member, despite his
family’s denials.

At one point, officials accused Luu of taking part in a fight in Philadelphia in
2008, when he was living in Virginia. A notice of his suspension hearing went to
his family in English, a language they struggle to understand.

District officials later acknowledged that Luu had no connection to street
gangs, dropping the allegation they had used to ban him from the school.

Despite winning the right to return, Luu decided to transfer to a private
school. More recently he transferred to Furness High, a city school.

Terms of the settlements require that cases involving those learning English –
19 percent of South Philadelphia High students – be handled in a different way.

To start, the Human Relations Commission settlement states, victims of racial
harassment “ought not to be portrayed as perpetrators or gang members bearing
equal guilt with their attackers.”

Interpreters

The federal settlement says the district must ensure that interpreters are
provided to English-language learners who complain of harassment. Interpreters
also are to be made available when their parents meet with school staff.

If an English-language learner faces disciplinary action, interpretation must be
provided at hearings and meetings. Parents must be notified – in their native
language – of the translators’ availability.

Starting next month, the school must choose those translators from a formal,
pre-approved list – an important change. In the past, whoever was nearby and
happened to speak the language might be pressed into service. That included
students who often spoke little English themselves.

“You can see that a lot of the provisions are directly related to Hao’s case,”
said Cecilia Chen, an attorney with the Asian American Legal Defense and
Education Fund, which filed the original civil-rights complaint with the Justice
Department.

The government acted less than a year after receiving the complaint – lightning
speed in these types of cases, which are rare in themselves. The other prominent
example is Lafayette High School in Brooklyn, N.Y., where violence against
Asians prompted an investigation and, ultimately, a court order to fix the
problem.

In Philadelphia, federal investigators moved aggressively to interview dozens of
students, teachers, and staff after receiving the complaint in January.

By July, investigators had reached a conclusion: The district had deprived Asian
students of equal protection under the law – guaranteed by the Constitution – by
remaining “deliberately indifferent” to “severe and pervasive” harassment and
violence.

Settlement drafts

The district was informed. Faced with a strong federal finding and the prospect
of fighting the unlimited resources of the federal government, the district had
little choice but to settle.

Drafts of a potential settlement began to be traded back and forth, a process
that went on for much of the summer.

Asian groups insisted that any agreement contain language stating that the
attacks were rooted in racial bias – a finding the district had discouraged,
long maintaining that the events surrounding Dec. 3 represented general violence
that could have occurred anywhere.

The School District denied that it was “deliberately indifferent” to Asian
students’ plight and admitted no wrongdoing.

The federal court will maintain jurisdiction over the settlement for 21/2 years.
The government can seek to enforce the agreement in court if it believes the
district is not in compliance.

Helen Gym of Asian Americans United spoke on behalf of several Asian American
organizations at Monday’s meeting, telling the commission that the settlements
were the result of “a year of bruising struggle and painful polarization” with
the School District.

“It started with the voices of the students,” she said. “It is their voices that
transformed a school and a city.”

[https://www.philly.com/philly/news/homepage/20101221_Asian_students_praised_for_role_in_2_Philly_school_settlements.html](https://www.philly.com/philly/news/homepage/20101221_Asian_students_praised_for_role_in_2_Philly_school_settlements.html)