---
title: Chinatown Property Owners Say City Illegally Charged Them BID Fees Before BID Even Existed
authors: []

#layout: layouts/post.njk
date: 2012-04-11T23:05:56+00:00


---

Village Voice — Some Chinatown property owners didn’t really want to be part of
a Business Improvement District in the first place. Now a group of them are
claiming that the city illegally charged them fees corresponding to months
_before_ the BID even officially existed.

The city told the _Voice_ yesterday that it is correcting that error, but that’s
doing little to appease some frustrated business owners.

These [BIDs, which are public-private
partnerships](https://www.nyc.gov/html/sbs/html/neighborhood/bid.shtml), are
intended to revitalize neighborhoods and support economic development through a
partnership of local property owners and commercial tenants. Businesses pay
annual fees that BIDs charge for cleaning sidewalks, picking up trash, and other
local efforts.

To those who didn’t want to be a part of a [Chinatown
BID](https://www.supportchinatownbid.org/index.htm) in the first place, the
alleged financial mishap is an extra slap in the face, especially as businesses
are struggling to stay afloat during a tough economy.

A group of property owners, with the support of the [Asian American Legal
Defense and Education
Fund](/press-release/city-rescinds-thousands-in-illegal-chinatown-bid-fees-after-property-owners-protest/),
argued that the city’s Department of Finance held property owners responsible
for thousands of dollars in BID fees for four months before it was officially
established. They asked the city to rescind these charges last month and said
they finally heard back at the end of the month when the Department of Small
Business Services acknowledged to them that there had been an error.

“Even just a small amount is a huge burden for these businesses and small
property owners,” said Bethany Li, a staff attorney at AALDEF, who joined
disgruntled BID members yesterday to announce that they would be getting their
money back. “It really makes a difference between a bustling store and an empty
storefront.”

Apparently, members of the BID were charged fees from October through January,
even though the BID did not get final approvals until January. The fees vary
depending on factors such as the size of the property, but Jan Lee, who owns two
neighborhood properties, said that at just one of his sites, the incorrect fees
added up to $1,730.

“This misappropriation of our funds lived up to every suspicion that we had
going into this,” said Lee, 46, whose family has owned property in the
neighborhood for 80 years. Lee, who has been a loud opponent of the formation of
the BID, said that the incorrect fees add up to hundreds of thousands of illegal
charges across different owners.

A spokesperson for the city’s Department of Small Business Services, which
administers the BID program, told the _Voice_ yesterday that “the BID billing
has been adjusted and began as of February, 2012.”

In September, the City Council passed the Chinatown BID law and the mayor also
signed off of it, but it did not get final approvals from the State Comptroller
until January, 2012, spokesperson Merideth Weber said. The amount to be charged
for the fiscal year will be around $500,000 instead of $900,000 and property
owners will be notified of the assessment being charged and how credit will be
applied for those that did pay the fees, she said.

She also added in an email, “After several years of planning, the Chinatown BID
is now operating and will help improve the business environment for the nearly
800 retail stores in Chinatown, bring new visitors to the community, and enhance
the overall quality of life for residents by ensuring clean and safe streets in
the neighborhood.” Lee said he’s still very frustrated and that struggling
businesses can’t afford any of these fees. “In speaking with literally dozens of
Chinatown property owners…it’s very rare for our tenants to pay on time. That
is an indication to us that they don’t have the cash flow.

We’ve been managing property for generations. When people aren’t paying rent on
time…what are we supposed to do?” BID fees, he said, sometimes force businesses
to raise rent, though others don’t want to do that to their tenants and know
that in some cases it just won’t work if they’re already behind on payments.

Plus, they don’t need the services of the BID, Lee said. “Tenants usually sweep
the sidewalks themselves.”  Li, from AALDEF, said it’s a troubling sign that the
city — which now oversees 67 BIDs — made this kind of error. “My understanding
is the city just misunderstood the law, which is problematic given that this is
their 67th BID.”

Ultimately, she added, the fees of the BID can be burdensome to longtime
businesses who have to participate. “Once the city approves it, there’s nothing
you can do.”

By Sam Levin

[Read at the Village Voice >][1]

[1]: https://blogs.villagevoice.com/runninscared/2012/04/chinatown_prope.php
