---
title: City to Boost English Learners
authors: []

#layout: layouts/post.njk
date: 2011-10-12T18:39:51+00:00


---

![Students.jpg](/uploads/Students.jpg)

Wall Street Journal — More than a year after the state Education Department
warned New York City that it was short-changing students whose first language
isn’t English, officials announced Wednesday that the city has agreed to improve
instruction.

The state warned city officials in March 2010 that the Department of Education
failed to quickly identify students who needed English language classes and did
not have enough certified bilingual teachers available.

To fix that, the city agreed to open 125 new bilingual programs by 2014, to
encourage teachers to become certified to teach English as a second language and
to make other changes.

Khin Mai Aung, attorney for the Asian American Legal Defense and Education Fund,
called the plan a “major step forward.” For years, the group has been pushing
for better services for students learning English and issuing reports about
problems, such as the disappearance of some bilingual services when large high
schools were broken up into smaller ones.

State Education Commissioner John King said students who don’t speak English as
a first language lag on state tests, graduation rates and college preparedness.

“The outcomes are quite poor, and my view is that where students aren’t
achieving, that means the adults have a responsibility to change their practices
to help students achieve at a higher level,” he said.  The city Department of
Education said it will be able to meet the goals within its existing budget.
But the city doesn’t have a cost estimate yet, so it’s unclear where resources
will come from, or whether other areas would lose teachers or funding, a
spokesman said.

Principals who don’t meet the department’s goals could lose funding, lose points
on annual progress reports or have a letter placed in their personnel files.

In the 2010-11 school year, 650 eligible students–out of nearly 165,000–didn’t
receive any English language or bilingual education, and 2,395 students were not
being taught by a certified bilingual or English as a second language teacher.

Ms. Aung recalled a girl who had recently emigrated from Myanmar when she
enrolled in a sports management program. Beyond trying to learn English, she was
also lost in a mess of sports jargon.

“She was plopped into these courses. She was able to follow a little bit, but
she spent hours at home on the Internet trying to figure out what words were
used in class,” she said. “Those are the types of things that can happen. The
students just fall between the cracks.” The city provided data to show it has
been improving in some areas. For example, in the 2009-10 school year, 78% of
new students whose home language was not English were assessed within 10 days of
enrolling in the system. That number rose to 86% last year. In a statement, city
schools Chancellor Dennis Walcott said he looked forward to implementing the
“bold plan.”

By Lisa Fleisher, Wall Street Journal

[Click to read the article >][1]

Image: Charlie Nguyen/Flickr

[1]: https://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052970204002304576627443701272586.html
