---
title: Despite high voter turnout, Asian Americans face barriers to voting on Election
  Day
authors: []
#layout: layouts/post.njk
date: 2016-11-08T19:40:03+0000
related_programs: []
link_to_original: ''
images: []

---
New York City…Many Asian American voters across the country, especially new
citizens and first-time voters, encountered barriers and discrimination at
polling places, including improper requests for identification, inadequate
language assistance, no provisional ballots, being sent to multiple incorrect
poll sites, and discrimination against American Muslim women wearing hijabs or
niqabs. Some voters who submitted timely applications for absentee ballots in
NY or mail-in ballots in San Jose, Calif. never received their ballots and
could not vote.

The Asian American Legal Defense and Education Fund (AALDEF), a New York-based
national organization, dispatched more than 950 attorneys, law students, and
community volunteers to 137 polling places in 14 states with large Asian
American populations, where they recorded voter complaints and conducted a
nonpartisan multilingual exit poll of Asian American voters. AALDEF also
received reports of voting barriers via a multilingual telephone hotline, by
email, and on social media.

“Asian American voters had to overcome numerous obstacles in order to exercise
their right to vote today,” said Jerry Vattamala, Director of AALDEF’s Democracy
Program. “Our attorneys are investigating every complaint, and we will report
our findings and observations to local and state election officials, as well as
the U.S. Department of Justice.”

A summary of voting problems reported on Election Day follows:

**Norcross, GA**

At the Lucky Shoals Community Center in Gwinnett County, where heavy voter
turnout was expected, Asian American and Latino voters were not allowed to be
assisted by a person of their choice, as required by section 208 of the Voting
Rights Act. Voters waited three hours on line and were sent to the wrong poll
sites by poll workers. Several voting machines broke down, and poll workers
said they ran out of provisional ballots.

**Canton, Michigan**

At Summit on the Park, a poll worker told an American Muslim female voter to
remove her niqab and reveal her face before showing her voter ID.

**Philadelphia, PA**

Several voters at South Philadelphia Branch Library and Reed Street
Presbyterian Apartments in South Philadelphia said they were sent to the wrong
poll sites and not given referral slips to the correct sites. Voters were not
offered provisional ballots if their names were not on the voter rolls, as
required by the Help America Vote Act. In addition, there was a need for
Vietnamese language assistance, but there were no on-site interpreters, and
poll workers said they were not aware of AT&T Language Line services.

At Chinese Church & Christian Center, there were long lines, with some voters
waiting over two hours.

**Bensalem, PA**

Trump supporters followed many voters entering the poll site and looked over
the shoulders of Asian American voters who filled out AALDEF exit poll
questionnaires. Voters were not given provisional ballots if their names did
not appear on the voter rolls.

**Fairfax, VA**

At Mosby Woods Elementary School, an Asian American voter was refused a
provisional ballot after requesting one several times from a poll worker.

**New York, NY**

_Improper requests for voter IDs_. Asian American voters were asked to present
voter IDs at several poll sites, including P.S. 217 in Midwood, Brooklyn, and at
PS 222 and IS 230 in Jackson Heights, Queens. Voter IDs are not required in NY,
except for certain first-time voters.

_Absentee ballots not received_. We received two complaints from voters who
requested absentee ballots from the NYC Board of Elections but never received
them, even though their applications were submitted months before Election Day.
They were unable to vote.

_Broken voting machines._ There were several reports of ballot scanner machines
breaking down throughout the city, including PS 62 in Richmond Hills and
Confucius Plaza in Manhattan’s Chinatown.

At PS 214 in Flushing, Queens, one poll worker told several Asian American
voters that they had to vote for all candidates on a party ticket in order for
their ballots to be counted. That poll worker was later removed after our
complaints to the NYC Board of Elections.

At PS 20 in Flushing, Queens, Asian American voters said they were treated
rudely by one poll worker, who refused to give voters affidavit ballots when
their names could not be found in the voter rolls. Several voters also
complained about poll worker misinformation when told they were at the wrong
poll site.

At PS 85 in Astoria, Queens, our poll monitors reported that interpreters were
situated far away from Asian American voters, making it difficult for them to
secure language assistance that was available, as required by section 203 of
the Voting Rights Act.

At P.S. 217 in Midwood, Bengali women complained they were singled out by poll
workers to show voter ID because they were wearing hijabs. In addition,
although many voters needed Bengali language assistance, interpreters and
translated materials at Brooklyn site are not mandated under the Voting Rights
Act.

At Confucius Plaza in Manhattan’s Chinatown and PS 62 in Richmond Hill, Queens,
where ballot scanners broke down, voters were not given emergency ballots.
Instead, they were told to fill out regular ballots that would be scanned
later, creating uncertainty about whether their votes would be counted.

**Jersey City, NJ**

At Fire House on Sip Avenue, where the voting machine broke down, an Asian
American voter was told to come back later when it was fixed, rather than being
given an emergency ballot.

**San Jose, CA**-Voters in San Jose said they never received their mail-in
ballots and had difficult voting in person.

Additional information about problems reported by Asian American voters, as well as the results of AALDEF’s Asian American Exit Poll on Election Day, will be released later this week. AALDEF has conducted nonpartisan exit polls since 1988. In the [2012 presidential election](/uploads/pdf/Asian%20American%20Vote%202012.pdf), AALDEF polled 9,096 Asian American voters in 12 languages in 14 states.

For more information, contact:

Jerry Vattamala, Democracy Program Director  
212\.966.5932 x209  
jvattamala@aaldef.org  
  
Margaret Fung, Executive Director  
212\.966.5932 x201  
mfung@aaldef.org

The Asian American Legal Defense and Education Fund (AALDEF), founded in 1974,
is a New York-based national organization that protects and promotes the civil
rights of Asian Americans. By combining litigation, advocacy, education, and
organizing, AALDEF works with Asian American communities across the country to
secure human rights for all.

AALDEF partnered with 121 national and local groups, law firms, and student associations to mobilize volunteers for Election Day.