---
title: 'Educating for Democracy: The People’s Trial of Mayor Bloomberg'
authors: []

#layout: layouts/post.njk
date: 2011-10-16T13:28:30+00:00


---

![bloomberg.jpg](/uploads/bloomberg.jpg)

Huffington Post — Shortly after Mayor Michael Bloomberg assumed control of the
New York City school system, he presented his programs as a national leader in
“educational reform.” But there has been evidence in the New York public schools
in the recent past of
[cheating](https://www.nytimes.com/2011/09/09/education/09cheat.html) on
standardized tests by teachers and supervisors.

Moreover, the much publicized “success” of the mayor’s program has been in part
[based on](https://www.nytimes.com/2010/07/29/education/29scores.html) inflated
test scores and the “dumbing down” of the tests themselves. Yet under the
mayor’s “leadership” Bloomberg continues to close down

“failing” schools and replace them with charter schools causing wide-spread
disruption to students, parents and veteran teachers. As a result of these
closings, some of the most valuable and experienced teachers lose their
positions and end up in “ATR” (Absent Teacher Reserve) where they are misused as
substitute teachers with no permanent position since the principals are
reluctant to hire high-salary veterans and prefer to employ cheaper,
inexperienced teachers to meet their “bottom line.” This is the business model
of education that the Bloomberg Administration has imposed.

At a “trial” held at DC 37 of AFSCME (American Federation of State, County and
Municipal Employees sponsored by the Coalition for Public Education
[forpubliced.org](https://forpubliced.org) and hosted by Sam Anderson, a noted
educational leader dedicated to wresting the school system out of mayoral
control, testimony was given by dozens of parents, teachers and concerned
educators describing the negative effect the mayor’s “educational reform” has
produced in what seems to be a part of a nationwide attempt to privatize the
public schools, deskill teachers, strip them of their union rights, and firmly
establish a two-tier educational system: one for the privileged and one for
everyone else.

The all-day trial was adjudicated by such well-known legal authorities as
**Thomas Mariadson, of the Asian-American Legal Defense Fund**, Esmeralda
Simmons, of the Center for Law and Social Justice, Damon Hewitt of the NAACP
Legal Defense Fund and attended by City Councilman Charles Barron. Angel
Gonzalez, a member of GEM (Grassroots Education Movement) described in detail
the destructive effect of school closings in which a disproportionate number of
Black and Latino students are pushed out of their neighborhood schools to
accommodate charter schools. This process

not only results in damage to the students but a disproportionate number of
Black and Latino teachers end up as ATR’s further diminishing the ethnic
diversity of the system. Among other results of the co-location of charter
schools in district schools is that they-the charters- cut back on needed
programs in bi-lingual and special needs education.
[Read the rest at the Huffington Post >][1]

_Joel Shatzky for the Huffington Post_

Image: David Berkowitz/flickr

[1]: https://www.huffingtonpost.com/joel-shatzky/educating-for-democracy-t_5_b_1014624.html
