---
title: 'Military necessity? Japanese Latin Americans say U.S. owes an apology for WWII kidnappings; Also on the PODCAST, Trumpcare’s defeat'
contributors: ["contributor/emil-guillermo.md"]

#layout: layouts/post.njk
date: 2017-03-28T22:58:33+00:00



---

Art Shibayama, 86, was in Washington, DC and stood by the “Unfinished Business”
display at the National Museum of American History. He was there with his
friend, Blanca Katsura, also 86.

![ArtBlanca.jpg](/uploads/ArtBlanca.jpg)

Both were just 12 when they became part of a shameful and little-known episode
of U.S. history. Shibayama and Katsura were born and raised in Lima, Peru–Latin
American citizens. But in WWII, they were the foreigners the U.S. needed in the
name of “military necessity.”

Hear their stories on the podcast [here](https://bit.ly/2mOsvoz).

About 2,200 Japanese Latin Americans were rounded up and sent to the U.S., where
they were imprisoned in camps waiting to be used as pawns of war in two major
prisoner exchanges.

On _[Emil Amok’s Takeout](https://bit.ly/2mOsvoz)_, I talk to Shibayama, a key
survivor. This month, under his official name, Isamu Carlos Shibayama, he
brought his case before the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR) at
the Organization of American States.

He hopes the IACHR can compel the U.S. to give him, his brothers, and survivors
like Blanca a proper apology and reparations equal to the Japanese Americans who
were interned during WWII. Because of their foreign status, Japanese Latin
Americans were offered a fourth of the monetary compensation that Japanese
Americans received.

Hear the stories of Shibayama and Katsura, and their fight for justice on this
episode of _[Emil Amok’s Takeout](https://bit.ly/2mOsvoz)_.

**_Show Notes:_**

2:00 Emil’s take on Trumpcare defeat

5:00 How to Fix Obamacare

8:00 Art Shibayama calls it kidnapping.

14:20 Blanca Katsura felt she was without a country.

16:11 Phil Tajitsu Nash, civil rights activist and AALDEF board member talks
about the significance of the case before the IACHR.

Listen to the AALDEF podcast, Emil Amok’s Takeout, on the player below.
Subscribe for free on iTunes and never miss an episode! Hear them all on your
phone on demand, 24 hours a day.

<iframe
src="//html5-player.libsyn.com/embed/episode/id/5213457/height/360/width/500/theme/standard/autonext/no/thumbnail/yes/autoplay/no/preload/no/no_addthis/no/direction/backward/"
height="360" width="500" scrolling="no" allowfullscreen=""
webkitallowfullscreen="" mozallowfullscreen="" oallowfullscreen=""
msallowfullscreen=""></iframe>
