---
title: 'Comey’s prime time Trump dump, and a response to US strikes on Syria'
contributors: ["contributor/emil-guillermo.md"]

#layout: layouts/post.njk
date: 2018-04-16T10:23:38+00:00

draft: true
images:
 - "/uploads/ABC%20exclusive.jpg"
---

If Donald Trump thought he could control his fate with bombs bursting in air
over Syria, he was sadly mistaken.

He forgot about the importance of one of his old time slots–Sunday night—and the
significant  power it holds over the American people. Prime-time was enough to
elect Trump president, and in modern politics, it may be enough to remove him.


On Sunday, former FBI director James Comey regained the upper hand in the court
of public opinion. He  knows how to give good testimony. Comey doesn’t have a
perfect case, but he has a better story. He knows when Trump asked the vice
president and others to leave the room during a meeting for a one-on-one with
Comey; it was prescient for one thing and one thing only:  to ask Comey to let
the investigation against former national security advisor Michael Flynn “go.”

Let it go. You know, like from “Frozen.”

Comey said Trump’s exact words were, “I hope you can let it go.”

When asked by ABC News if it was obstruction of justice, Comey did more to Trump
than what Trump and allies did to Assad on Friday night.

“Possibly. I mean, it’s certainly some evidence of obstruction of justice,”
Comey said.

“But to kick out the vice president of the United States and the attorney
general, who I work for, so you could talk to me alone, something was up,” Comey
said. “He’s asking me to drop the criminal investigation of his now-former
national security adviser.”

![Trump and Comey.jpg](/uploads/Trump%20and%20Comey.jpg)

“If he didn’t know he was doing something improper, why did he kick out the
attorney general and the vice president of the United States and the leaders of
the intelligence community? I mean, why am I alone if he’s — doesn’t know the
nature of the request?” Comey said.

Trump, of course, denies it. But Trump’s record on the truth, based on the
_Washington Post_‘s Fact Checker (more than 2,000 false or misleading claims in
a year), on that videotape (“Access Hollywood” anyone?), or on your own visceral
sense of the man, the best an American TV juror in the middle-brow court of
public opinion could say is, something’s rotten here. And it’s not Denmark.

It is, of course, a “He said, he said.”

Add that to the “He said, she said,”  Stormy Daniels, Karen McDougal, and the
others claiming unprotected sex or unprotected harassment, and Trump is
inundated in pronoun battles.

Or as some of my grammar fluid gender anarchist students would say, it’s a case
of “they said, they said.”

But Comey said much more than that.

He’s the former FBI director, and while I know the FBI isn’t a band of saints,
they know exactly how bad real bad guys are.  Comey even compares Trump to a mob
boss in his new book, “A Higher Loyalty: Truth, Lies, and Leadership,” now
simply the Cliff Notes to this ABC interview in the land of the unread. Trump’s
not a reader. He knows the value of a prime time “You’re fired.” That makes
Comey’s Sunday as close to a death blow as it gets, especially when Comey, the
former top law enforcement official in the land, calls Trump “morally unfit” to
be president.

And Trump tweets that  Comey is a “slimeball”? That sort of response only proves
Comey’s point. The president has lost all moral leadership in our country when
he can’t even summon up the high ground of his office.

And Trump Tower doesn’t count.

Should he be impeached?

Comey said he’d rather the American public take him out at the ballot box. I’ve
said the same. We should undo our own mess.

Besides so far, the only one I’ve seen defending Trump has been the RNC, which
denounced Comey’s comments saying they “denigrate the millions of people who
voted” for Trump.

That’s why the ballot box is important.

But there are some who have ADHD and can’t wait.

I personally dislike impeachment as a political move, but Trump has lowered the
bar when it comes to the presidency. He’s diminished the country and the office.

That’s why I’m surprised at the tepid response to the Syrian strikes. You want a
reason to impeach? The missles on Syria give you a reason.

The first batch last year, I called Trump’s “cruise missile Viagra.”

Last Friday’s strike, with Great Britain and France along for the ride, was like
his anti-depressant, a “go away pill.” If the reports are true about Trump’s
anger over Comey’s leaked book, and Trump’s own personal attorney under
investigation for the Stormy Daniels matter, not to mention Urinegate, I think
Trump figured he could make it all go away by rattling a sabre and seeming
presidential.

But Americans didn’t care.

In fact, many think how Assad used chemical weapons on his own people was wrong.
So it didn’t spoil their weekend.

The strikes should have. And Trump should have taken the matter first to
Congress.

“It’s a clear-cut violation of the United Nations charter,” Francis Boyle,
professor of international law at the University of Illinois College of Law,
told me by phone over the weekend. “It’s a violation of the War Powers clause of
the U.S. Constitution. It’s a violation of the War Powers resolution enacted by
Congress. This constitutes a Nuremberg crime against peace, and an aggression in
violation of the Rome statute of the U.S. criminal court definition. So there’s
no legality at all that I can tell, just wanton and naked aggression…It’s
clearly illegal and all these actions by President Trump are certainly
impeachable as well.”

Boyle said someone in the House of Representatives should be drawing up
impeachment papers now.

Because there is a case for peace and it begins with the rule of law.

That there’s not the hue and cry suggests that the hawks are in charge and no
one wants to challenge Trump on this. That’s how bad Assad is. He’s worse than
Trump and provides cover. No one doubts the attack.

My friend Rod Mc Leod, a former Jones Day partner, and now a Filipino American
living in Israel, sent me this e-mail after the attacks.

> People forget the history of chemical use by Assad against his people. Obama
> threatened a missile attack but pulled back at the last minute when Russia said
> they would take Assad’s chemicals. There was even a US ship that was sent to
> incinerate such base chemicals. But Assad agreed to never use them again.
>
> Well, Assad was a ruthless liar. He used chemicals many times, until a year or
> so ago, Trump sent his 59 cruise missiles as a warning. Now Assad did it again.
> And Russia is trying to cover up for Assad by vetoing a chemical inspection and
> accusing the Western powers of jumping to conclusions.
>
> Bottom line, Trump did the right thing.

Most of the U.S. agrees.

But not Boyle, and frankly, not me.

Trump attacked last year and Assad didn’t learn. What does a second strike do?

When Trump is for pulling out of Syria one week, then bombing it the next, it
only shows the U.S. has no Syria policy. And tha t’s the problem. A
“humanitarian” missile strike only stirs up the region resulting in more death,
and a crisis that Boyle says is worse than the start of World War I.

If the U.S. is involved, it needs a plan. And it must go through Congress. U.N.
Ambassador Nikki Haley saying the U.S. is “locked and loaded” isn’t a plan.

Forget about the geo-politics for now, even though that says a lot about where
to find the moral basis (or lack thereof) for U.S. action or inaction over
Syria. Greedy modern nations still must have their oil. But if it leads the U.S.
into military action, a president must take the case to Congress.

If he doesn’t, that’s impeachable. Obama feared that in 2013, and wisely didn’t
act. Not in Syria. And even Bush the First feared impeachment in his day and
didn’t go all the way into Baghdad in the first Gulf War.

Donald Trump doesn’t seem to fear impeachment. But he’s getting it from all
directions now. From Stormy and the ladies, to Cohen, Mueller, and Comey.

Trump’s too busy to be our president. And too small to be above the law.
