---
title: 'Asian Americans not immune from gun violence, so why no mention in Obama’s CNN gun show?'
contributors: ["contributor/emil-guillermo.md"]

#layout: layouts/post.njk
date: 2016-01-08T08:57:17+00:00


tags:
- Asian Americans
- gun violence
---

I hate guns. But I hate wimpier attempts at gun control more.

And President Obama’s latest attempt is so modest, so restrained, it hardly
makes the NRA quake in its boots.

Even the president admitted, it’s hardly a conspiracy to take away anyone’s
guns. It’s really just a first step to a relatively empty gesture.

More background checks are nice, but they wouldn’t have prevented the most
newsworthy shooting massacres of modern times.

More concerning is that Asian Americans were left out of Obama’s big town hall
on guns ballyhooed on CNN.

And I had my Asian American detector out.

And what do you know?

It felt like I was watching some cop show on network TV.

There in the back row, like an extra in a Hollywood TV or movie production,
Asian American #1.

I didn’t see any other Asian Americans. Did you?

![Obamatownhall.jpg](/uploads/Obamatownhall.jpg)

Once again, we don’t count, as if Asian Americans aren’t affected by guns in
America.

Don’t kid yourself.

After the San Bernardino shootings on Dec. 2 (perpetrated by two South Asians),
the _Los Angeles Times_ went back to 1984 and counted the most notable mass
shootings in America.

There were 45 shooting events considered “notable.”

The CNN/Obama event included mention of [Newtown,
Conn](/blog/newtown-a-marker-for-how-far-we-havent-come-in-the-gun-control-debate/).,
where 27 were killed, one injured, on Dec. 14, 2012.

The CNN show even featured former Arizona Rep. Gabrielle Giffords, a survivor of
the Jan. 8, 2011 attack that killed six in Tucson, Ariz.

But that’s just two of the 45 on the notable list, which also includes the
Colorado shootings in Columbine and Aurora.

Among the others on the list, Asian Americans were on both sides of the barrel,
as shooters or victims, in at least nine of the noteworthy shootings since 1984.

And wouldn’t it be just like us to be No.1?

How soon we forget April 16, 2007, when Seung-hui Cho, a 23-year-old Virginia
Tech senior, went on a rampage killing 32 and injuring 17. And then he sent
videos and manifestos to NBCNews.

{{< youtube VyalPi1GeDY >}}

Cho purchased everything legally and even passed a background check. But he also
failed to disclose being an outpatient in a mental health program. That might
have been relevant to the discussion, considering the Obama plan’s component to
fund mental health programs.

But maybe people just want to forget Virginia Tech for wrecking the grading
curve.

So what about the April 3, 2009 shooting in Binghamton, New York, when Asian
American [Jiverly
Voong](https://www.amok.com/blog/today-shows-exclusive-interview-of-jiverly-wongs-sister-a-great-get-but/)
shot and killed 13 people and injures four?

That shooting even had a [Filipino American
victim](https://www.amok.com/blog/jiverly-wong-and-binghamtons-legacy-the-birth-of-the-immigrant-on-immigrant-hate-crime/).

Or how about the mass shooting on Aug. 5, 2012, when Wade Michael Page, a white
supremacist, fatally [shot six people and injured four others at a Sikh
temple](/blog/tale-of-three-shootings-aurora-sikh-temple-oikos--how-it-plays-when-victims-are-people-of-color/).

President Obama might have included a Nov. 2, 1999 incident, in the president’s
other home, Honolulu. On that day, Bryan Uyesugi, a copier repairman, shot and
killed seven co-workers with a legally-owned Glock. Even with a background check
disclosing mental issues, he was allowed to obtain guns. He’s now serving a life
sentence without possibility of parole.

That’s more than enough for inclusion on a CNN show, don’t you think?

We don’t even need to mention the recent Asian American victims: [Jennifer
Markovsky](/blog/planned-parenthood-shooting-claims-asian-american-victim-hawaiis-jennifer-markovsky/)
at the Planned Parenthood shooting in Denver, or [Tin
Nguyen](/blog/emil-guillermo-theyve-finally-used-the-t-word-in-san-bernardino-but-will-it-fan-islamophobia/)
in San Bernardino.

Or the rampage in Isla Vista, Calif., on May 23, 2014 of half-Asian [Elliot
Rodger](/blog/elliot-rodgers-manifesto-shows-self-hate-fueled-anti-asian-violence-that-kicked-off-isla-vista-rampa/).

The _Los Angeles Times_ list also includes the schoolyard shootings in Stockton,
California, Jan. 17, 1989, when Patrick Purdy killed five people and injured 32.
His victims were mostly Southeast Asian refugees.

In schoolyards, dormitories, immigration centers, workplaces, birth control
clinics–you name it, Asian Americans have been on both sides of the gun debate,
as victims and perps.

I’ve got my own issues with Obama’s executive initiatives. For example, what
good are background checks when more and more people are allowed not just
concealed carry, but to open carry weapons?

The president acknowledges he can’t do anything about accidental shootings. But
what about the laws that protect gun owners who mistakenly shoot the wrong
people, then hide behind broad self-defense laws?

It’s the reason my cousin, Stephen, is dead and his killer was allowed to go
free.

I would have wanted to let the president know a thing or two.

But it doesn’t seem like they were letting Asian Americans in the studio.

Pre-show, post-show. Not even the show show.

I saw one Asian woman. Did I miss anyone else? A cameraman?

Maybe it was just easier for CNN to round up white and black folks to discuss
guns and violence because that fulfills the stereotype.

Simpler just to exclude Asian Americans. Maybe it’s an accent thing?

But the message is clear when it comes to public policy yet again.

On many important social issues of our day, we still don’t count. Every time it
seems like we’ve gone beyond the “inclusion thing,” there’s always a reminder
that we haven’t.

That _Los Angeles Times_ list of shootings shows at five percent of the country,
Asian Americans are outpunching our weight class.

Yet somehow, we still don’t rate a peep when it comes to a town hall on guns in
America.

That should have been easy. A lot easier, say, than getting Congress or local
and state lawmakers to make a real difference and act beyond the president’s
meek initiatives.
