---
title: 'Riding Wong Kim Ark to combat GOP’s anchor baby talk, and thanks to family of Dr. Suzanne Ahn'
contributors: ["contributor/emil-guillermo.md"]

#layout: layouts/post.njk
date: 2015-08-21T11:07:51+00:00



---

One hundred twenty years ago, in the latter part of August, the U.S. picked a
fight with Wong Kim Ark, who then took his case all the way to the [Supreme
Court][1]. Wong was simply coming back from a vacation to China, when he was
denied re-entry in San Francisco.

![Wong Kim Ark2.jpg](/uploads/Wong%20Kim%20Ark2.jpg)

His Chinese parents weren’t citizens, but they lived in San Francisco’s
Chinatown. Wong was born right there at 751 Sacramento Street, behind Old Saint
Mary’s Cathedral.Wong was a U.S. citizen and #NotYourAnchorBaby. But what is
that? The illegitimate love child of Connie Chung and Dan Rather? No, in today’s
parlance, “anchor baby” refers to the American-born child of non-citizen
immigrants, who “use” the baby to get all the benefits of citizenship. In the
1890s of Wong, saying “anchor baby” would just seem strange, unless you were a
drunken sailor.These days, Tea Party-types and birthers, those midwives of
xenophobic hate, like to use the anchor-baby rhetoric because it’s cute, masking
how downright offensive the term really is.

Sure, politicians love to kiss all babies–just not those darn anchor
babies.Perfect for The Donald, the candidate who believes he’s invincible like a
human trump card, better than all. He’s been trumping the GOP candidates left
and right and playing the anchor baby card. But in his zeal to defend the
Constitution, Trump, like many others, have a massive blind spot.It’s called
“history.”And that’s where Wong Kim Ark trumps Trump.It’s imperative to invoke
Wong every few years, whenever the xenophobes in places like Louisiana, Georgia,
Texas, and Arizona, get their dander up about immigration and start throwing up
the “anchor baby” rhetoric.  The first time I even heard of Wong, who was always
a relatively obscure constitutional law milestone, I was writing columns at San
Francisco’s _AsianWeek_, where I went amok for 15 years.

Since then, in my five years writing in this AALDEF space,
I’ve [written about
Wong](/blog/the-patron-saint-of-the-undocumented-is-an-asian-american/)
once before in 2011, when the Tea Party crowd in Arizona revved up the
anti-immigrant frenzy and tried to codify an actual two-tier citizenship system.
Imagine the possible marketing ads: Come home all ye anchor babies to Arizona,
where you can be an official second class citizen! Thankfully, that law didn’t
pass. But here we are in 2016, and everything old is new again.A new batch of
GOP hopefuls are trying to convince conservatives that they are more hateful
than the other. And there really isn’t anything better in the campaign trick bag
to divide the base and make one seem more of a conservative bad-ass than to use
anti-immigrant, anchor baby rhetoric.It leaves good “citizen historians” little
option but to ram back birther ignorance with a little chapter and verse from
the legal file of Wong Kim Ark, U.S. citizen.

The final graph of Justice Horace Gray’s majority opinion on birthright
citizenship reads:

> Upon the facts agreed in this case, the American citizenship which Wong Kim
> Ark acquired by birth within the United States has not been lost or taken away
> by anything happening since his birth. No doubt he might himself, after coming
> of age, renounce this citizenship and become a citizen of the country of his
> parents, or of any other country; for, by our law, as solemnly declared by
> Congress, “the right of expatriation is a natural and inherent right of all
> people,” and any declaration, instruction, opinion, order or direction of any
> officer of the United States which denies, restricts, impairs or questions the
> right of expatriation, is declared inconsistent with the fundamental principles
> of the Republic.

In many ways, Wong’s fight for what should have been a no-brainer–birthright
citizenship–has been the basic problem of American identity.What does an
American look like? A real one, of course. Is it just White, like all those
non-natives who thought they had arrived first? Can an American really look like
any of us–Chinese, Filipino, Japanese, Indian, Korean, etc.–all who stand under
the AAPI umbrella?Our Founding Fathers bought into the English common law of
birthright citizenship when they forged the Constitution. When Wong took his
case to the Supreme Court, there was little question that “birth by soil,” an
idea that is nearly as old as dirt, would stand.

But let’s not give Justice Gray too much credit for an heroic Wong Kim Ark
decision. He also was in the majority in _Plessy v. Ferguson,_ which upheld the
idea of “separate but equal.”Still, the Wong Kim Ark decision has held for more
than 100 years. And though legal scholars and historians consider it settled
law, campaigning politicians consider it an ideal subject to unsettle and
disrupt. History, however, is on your side. Born here? Stand your ground. It’s
your birth right. Fight back the birthers by trumping them with Wong Kim Ark.
**_DR. SUZANNE AHN AWARD FOR CIVIL RIGHTS AND SOCIAL JUSTICE_**Last Saturday, I
was humbled and honored to be named the winner of the Asian American Journalists
Association’s Dr. Suzanne Ahn Award for Civil Rights and Social Justice.

![suzanneahn2.jpg](/uploads/suzanneahn2.jpg)

Dr. Ahn was a Korean immigrant who grew up in Arkansas and later became a
prominent physician, neurologist and inventor. She died of lung cancer in 2003
when she was just 51. But with the award, she is remembered as a civil rights
fighter.“She made a conscious effort to include anyone regardless of their
background, if they too shared her passion for righting wrongs and exposing
injustices,” her niece Suzy Pak told me. “In her later years, she used her
stature in the community to expose discrimination against Asian Americans at
many levels. Despite the attempts to intimidate or discount her position, she
never backed down. Ever.

Pak continued: “I can recount stories of her going to the White House to meet
with senators to discuss bills that were discriminatory. She was not afraid to
stand up for w hat was right, and felt compelled to fight for those who were not
in positions to be able to do so. She realized that the press was the most
efficient way to reach the largest number or people, across all socioeconomic
lines.”

“She recognized the great importance journalists play in alerting the general
public of social injustices, ” Pak said to me. “She wanted to establish a way to
recognize journalists who go above and beyond in advancing the rights for the
AAPI community.”

“She wanted to offer some recognition to those who shared her passion for civil
rights and let them know the work they were doing is vital and changing the
world. Twelve years after her death, my aunt would be proud of the award
recipients like yourself who have impacted our world with their work. She would
have wanted to talk to each of the AAJA members in attendance and encourage all
of you to keep fighting the fight and not rest, for there is plenty of work
still to be done.”At the AAJA dinner, I thanked the Ahn family for recognizing
the importance to tell the story that’s in our blood. That’s the legacy of
discrimination that we all share. It’s been the main disruptor of Asian American
lives. From the Chinese Exclusion Act, to the passing of the Tydings-McDuffie
Act in 1934, which changed Filipinos’ status from American nationals to aliens,
to the Japanese American incarceration during WWII, the earliest Asian American
groups have all felt the sting of anti-Asian hate and discrimination.And even as
Asian American journalists, we know it first hand from our job experiences. But
it’s also in our DNA to fight back. Wong Kim Ark sure did. And so did Dr.
Suzanne Ahn.

[1]: https://www.law.cornell.edu/supremecourt/text/169/649
