---
title: 'Rejecting a Trumpulent America'
contributors: ["contributor/emil-guillermo.md"]

#layout: layouts/post.njk
date: 2017-08-14T11:10:18+00:00


tags:
- Charlottesville
- North Korea
- Trump
- white nationalists white supremacists

---

The Trump hotel brand oozes opulent luxuriousness. But now that Trump is in
public office for the first time (and right at the top), I’ve coined a word to
capture the new Trump style of government and political rhetoric.

Take one part truculent (“the quality of being disposed or eager to fight or
engage in hostile opposition”); Add a dash of petulance (“insolent and rude
behavior”); Insert one Donald (orange hair special); Mix with reckless abandon,
et voila!

The president’s signature style? Forget opulence. We’ve got Trumpulence.

And, of course, it’s the likes of which we’ve never seen before.

Unless you see it in your neighbor, or in Charlottesville, Virginia.

A president is capable of setting the moral tone of the country. And so far,
this one’s setting a bad example.

After last Friday, we worried about the tweeting, adlibbing Trump, sabre
rattling and goading a madman in North Korea to commit a suicidal act.

Such an aggressive stance didn’t make sense after new U.N. sanctions were passed
against North Korea. But international bluster is often a good cover after a
domestic embarrassment, like the failed repeal of Obamacare.

To Trump’s credit, all the nuke talk made people more aware of the PIs among the
AAPIs, particularly those in Guam and the Northern Mariana Islands. In the
crosshairs as just specks on the map, residents there are even considered
American citizens to the amazement of most Americans.

And wasn’t it eerie to see news reports in Guam warning residents to avoid
staring into the bright flash of a detonating bomb?

But now we know: Trump’s taunt of “mutually assured destruction” is not our
number one problem after all.

After the violence and casualties of the Charlottesville weekend, in what’s
being called the largest gathering of white supremacists in more than a decade,
we find ourselves asking more fundamental questions.

![charlottesville3.jpg](/uploads/charlottesville3.jpg)

Does Trump really care about equal rights for all as a cornerstone of our
American democracy?

And if he does, why wasn’t a passionate Trump, who had no problem going off
script and talking “fire and fury” about Kim Jong-un, going after those white
supremacists in Charlottesville with the same “in-your-face” zeal?

This was Trump’s chance to let all Americans know how he really felt about the
violent American Nazis in Virginia.

Among them was the ex-Klansman David Duke, who didn’t hesitate to fully embrace
Trump and the symbolic importance of the rally.

“This represents the turning point for the people of this country,” Duke said to
the media. “We are going to fulfill the promises of Donald Trump. That’s what we
believed in. That’s why we voted for Donald Trump, because he said he was going
to take our country back and that’s what we’re going to do.”

Others at the rally were no different from Duke. They were empowered by Trump.

It all required a strong rebuke from Trump in full throated trumpulence.

Shouldn’t be too hard. Trump has disavowed Duke in the past.

Instead, Trump held back. Pulled punch? He went through the motions.

On Saturday, Trump uncharacteristically read from his script, not bothering to
stray, except when he repeated a phrase at the end for emphasis. But it wasn’t
the tough talk we’ve been used to.

It was almost subdued and passionless, the opposite of his words.

“We condemn in the strongest possible terms this egregious display of hatred,
bigotry and violence on many sides–on many sides,” Trump said Saturday.

See the whole statement
[here](https://twitter.com/i/moments/896463516328239104).

More troubling was his use of the phrase “many sides.”

Why was Trump so careful not to single out the real culprits? How could he imply
the extreme violence came from extreme right-wing nationalists AND
counter-protestors? The suspect who drove a car into the crowd, killing one
woman and injuring multiple people, was a 20-year-old white supremacist.

This is where Trump could have unleashed the Kim treatment.

But he didn’t.

At times like these, we count on a president to use his position to show moral
leadership. To stand tall and lead us together.

After Charlottesville, Trump had his chance.

And he failed.

Civil rights leaders convened on Sunday to call on Trump to unequivocally and
directly disavow white supremacists and the violence in Charlottesville, as well
as fire key White House Chief Strategist Stephen Bannon, White House Deputy
Assistant Sebastian Gorka, and White House Senior Advisor Stephen Miller for
stoking hate and division.

Leaders representing The Leadership Conference on Civil and Human Rights, the
NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, the Anti-Defamation League, the Human
Rights Campaign, Muslim Advocates, National Council of Churches, and the
Southern Poverty Law Center, called Trump’s response to date “weak,
insufficient, and unacceptable.”

They’re not looking for mere lip service from Trump. They want to see real
action and a recognition of how we have fallen off track.

“The opportunity that we have at this moment is for this terrible tragic event
to show us all how far we’ve gone in just a very few months we’ve allowed
ourselves to go,” said Sherrilyn Ifill, president of the NAACP-LDF. “We’re
asking that we really confront what the threat is to the integrity of this
country. And to confront that requires not just that the president take action,
but that we really have a reckoning, and that means Congress also must recognize
ways that they have been complicit in allowing this environment to proliferate
that resulted in Charlottesville. They have to be prepared to use their platform
to stand against this and stand against this unequivocally. They have to show
the nation that being against white supremacy and being against white
nationalism, and being against racism and homophobia, should not be the province
of a political party. It is supposed to be part of what it means to be an
American and what it means to believe in democracy.”

Yes, this was not the way things were. But funny how things change when the
style and decorum are set by the current occupant of the White House.

Keep in mind, Trump waited days before commenting on the hate crime shooting
death of Indian American [Srinivas
Kuchibhotla](/blog/emil-guillermo-is-srinivas-kuchibhotla-the-vincent-chin-for-south-asians/)
in Kansas City. More recently, we still await a comment from Trump on the act of
terrorism against Muslims at a mosque in Minnesota. A more specific and direct
comment from Trump on the white supremacists in Charlottesville? Don’t hold your
breath.

Imagine his narcissistic agony. How do you criticize those who are responsible
for keeping you from sinking below 30 percent approval in the polls? They act in
your name and are so inspired by your tell-it-like-it-is attitude that they are
moved toward violent bigotry and racism.

Such is life in the era of American Trumpulence.

The likes of which we’ve never seen before? No, we have.

From the Chinese exclusion to the Filipinos in California in the 1930s, Asian Am
ericans have faced the ire of white nationalists. When the first big wave of
Filipinos arrived in the U.S., they were hounded by angry whites, who claimed
Filipinos stole their jobs and their women. It often led to violence by whites
against Filipinos that included lynchings in the Central Valley. It was fanned
by a hateful political rhetoric that resulted in significant anti-Filipino
legislation in Congress.

Trumpulence is just a revival of all that.

We must stand together, not merely to resist, but to reject it.
