---
title: 'How Filipinos discovered America, though America still resists discovering them'
contributors: ["contributor/emil-guillermo.md"]

#layout: layouts/post.njk
date: 2016-10-17T13:38:44+00:00


tags:
- Filipino American History Month
- Pedro de Unamuno

---

I confess Trump’s admission for his predilection of the Trumpian sexual offense
known as the “pussy grab” distracted me so much in the last week I plumb forgot
about Indigenous Peoples Day, Oct. 10.

Sorry.

I wasn’t even able to appropriately dis that overreaching Genoan sailing for
Spain, Christopher Columbus, for his much heralded land grab of 1492.

That’s OK–we have Oct.18, an even better day worth noting for all Asian
Americans.

On that very day in 1587, the First Filipinos from Asia landed in America. And
they didn’t grab a thing. At least, not for themselves. They even gave the
Indians food and clothing, as peace offerings to their fellow “Yndios.”

But the Filipinos were just working stiffs for the Spanish colonizers, who write
the history.

If you’re counting, 1587 is 95 years later than Columbus, but 33 years before
1620, when the much ballyhooed Pilgrims, with the oversized hats and buckles,
landed on a rock in Massachusetts and forgot it first belonged to the Indians.

Despite the egregious oversight, we still make much ado of those Mayflower folks
in November.

And those First Filipinos? Well, as usual, they’re like modern Asian Americans
who just don’t count.

Few make a big deal of Oct. 18, 1587, the day Pedro De Unamuno sailing for Spain
landed on Morro Bay, close to San Luis Obispo on the Central Coast of
California. But the Filipino American National Historical Society does, and it’s
the main reason October is Filipino American History Month.

While Unamuno, not a Filipino, is only partially obscured in history as one of
those “have-boat-will-travel” New World explorers, the Filipino parts of the
story are almost totally obscured.

![Unamuno5.jpg](/uploads/Unamuno5.jpg)

The turning point was the original research of Unamuno’s logs published in
UCLA’s _Amerasia Journal_ in 1996 by Eloisa Gomez Borah, librarian and a trustee
of FANHS. She makes the case for a Filipino presence, telling the story of how
Unamuno was part of a Spanish expedition led by Francisco Gali in 1584. When
Gali died, Unamuno lost command of the two ships he inherited after taking a
side trip to Macao. Stranded in Asia, Unamuno was finally able to buy another
boat, described by Borah as a ” single-deck three-masted vessel” named Nuestra
Senora de Buena Esperanza.

His deckhands and brawn were mostly Filipinos.

On July 12, 1587, Unamuno headed for points east and was at sea until the end of
his voyage on November 22, 1587 in Acapulco, Mexico.

But there was a brief three-day land excursion between October 18-20 that turned
out to be the northern California coast.

Unamuno sailed with the Franciscan Father Martin Ignacio de Loyola, nephew of
the founder of the Jesuit order, a few priests, and soldiers.

The logs also reveal the presence of at least eight Filipinos identified as
“Yndios Luzones,” or Luzon Indians from the northern Philippines island of
Luzon.

They were jacks-of-all-trade seamen, seen as the brawny manpower of the ship. In
an email exchange, Borah told me too often they were left off the logs.

“Filipinos present on these early explorations and trade ships were overlooked
in captains’ logs,” Borah said. “Even in Captain Unamuno’s log, which I chose
because he did mention “Indios Luzones,” documenting the presence of Filipino
natives was inconsistent, as my count in the article provides the proof.”

Borah counted “Yndios” appearing in the logs 42 times total. In 23 times, it was
a reference to the native Californians encountered, but 19 times it described
the crew.

But they mattered on Sunday, October 18. That’s when Unamuno, after anchoring
off the California coast in a place he called Puerto San Lucas, formed a landing
party.

![UnamunoLogs3.jpg](/uploads/UnamunoLogs3.jpg)

It was 12 armed soldiers led by Father Martin Ignacio de Loyola, cross in hand.
But even before the cross, up ahead of them all were two Filipinos armed with
swords and shields.

It was their typical formation.

On the first day, the expedition climbed two hills, saw no settlements or
people, and took possession of the land for the King of Spain.

On the second day, October 19, eight Filipino scouts led a priest and 12
soldiers for further exploration.

It was on the third day, October 20, that the expedition encountered violence.
But not before there was an effort from the ship’s barber and some Filipinos to
make a peace offering of food and clothing.  Borah said it was fine until the
Indians tried to kidnap the barber, and that’s when a violent exchange ensued.
The log noted one soldier was killed, but so was one unnamed Filipino, by a
javelin, his blood spilled on American soil.

Unamuno didn’t stay long. He left by daybreak on October 21 for Acapulco.

The significance of three days?

Borah calls it the unique evidence of a Filipino presence that is too often
obscured when historians fail to identify or differentiate among non-Europeans
in their crew.

When I contacted her this month, she was adamant.

“Filipino natives, among the non-white indios of that era, did not write the
logs or the letters to the king or any other contemporary documents,” Borah
wrote me in an email exchange. “However, Filipino indios were 4 out of 5 who
worked the Spanish galleons (Schurz, 1939) in crossing the Pacific for 250
years, and they were the advance guard in the land expeditions and provided the
information evidenced in Captain Unamuno’s log.”

She added, ” What needs to be done now is the championing of our history,
because while Filipino ‘crabs’ snipe at our history that is documented by
academic research, the Chinese are championing fable in 1421: The Year China
Discovered America by a former British Navy officer Gavin Menzies.”

Borah was referring to a much discredited story that suggests China discovered
America before Columbus.

So it’s interesting that Filipinos are still forgotten, unremarked upon, and
ignored, even as they exist as nearly a quarter of the more than 20 million
Asian Americans today.

And yet of all the Asian Americans, they were here first. And even though blood
was spilled, they left empty-handed after three October days in California,
1587.
