---
title: 'Kneeling for Puerto Rico and surviving the survival politics of Donald Trump'
contributors: ["contributor/emil-guillermo.md"]

#layout: layouts/post.njk
date: 2017-09-30T13:30:32+00:00


tags:
- NFL
- Puerto Rico
- Trump

---

I’m kneeling.

But not for the NFL, and not necessarily for my free speech rights (witness, I
still have them). Most certainly, I am not on bended knee for Donald Trump (more
on the NFL issue later).

No, as a good Catholic, I’m kneeling in prayer for Puerto Rico.

It could be the 51st state, after all.

But as I write, the people there continue to suffer like second class citizens
ever since the day Hurricane Maria ripped through the island on Sept. 20.

There’s still no power for most of the residents. Water, food, and gasoline
remain scarce.

![2-PRmayorLine.jpg](/uploads/2-PRmayorLine.jpg)

Hospitals are barely functioning. For the 3.4 million people of Puerto Rico,
it’s life and death, no matter what Acting Secretary of Homeland Security Elaine
Duke and Donald Trump say.

This is not a “good news” story.

And while there’s concern for all those in Puerto Rico, let’s not forget the
certainly under-recognized micro-minority of Asians on the island.

There are an estimated 21,000 Asian Puerto Ricans, from China, India, the
Palestinian territories, Jordan and Syria.

You don’t _see_ any of them on cable news. But let’s definitely make sure we add
them to our growing group of 21 million Asian Americans.

An astonishing fact from last week is that only 54 percent of Americans even
knew Puerto Ricans were U.S. citizens, according to a poll in _The New York
Times_.

And when you don’t know that fact, you just don’t care about Puerto Rico.

But that’s what the Trump administration is all about.

Ignorance is bliss. Ignorance of facts, of history, of context.

It lets Trump get away with his slowness to react and his less than empathetic
response when asked about Puerto Rico on Friday. That’s when, without a blush,
he said, “Things are going well.”

Of course, it doesn’t square after seeing the mayor of San Juan Carmen Yulin
Cruz on television pleading, “I am begging, begging, anyone who can hear us to
save us from dying.”

![CarmenCruz.jpg](/uploads/CarmenCruz.jpg)

Her truth was countered not by compassion, but by an ugly series of tweets by
Trump on Saturday, who blamed Yulin for poor leadership and her inability to get
their workers to help.

“They want everything to be done for them when it should be a community effort,”
Trump tweeted. “10,000 federal workers now on Island doing a fantastic job.”

This is our government’s leader. Instead of a compassionate call for unity in a
time of crisis, he thinks of himself first, defending his honor and slow
reaction time. He points a finger instead of reaching out.

More despicable is how his tweets imply the stereotype of the welfare dependent,
government-sucking folks who can do nothing for themselves. Forget the natural
disaster, Trump once again shows no sympathy for people of color made desperate
through no fault of their own.

But Trump gets away with it because, as we all know by now, he is always talking
to his “base.”

Who are these “base” people? They aren’t necessarily the blue collar workers
orphaned by the rise of technology. Most don’t blame technology; they blame
“illegal immigrants” and all those DACA folks. So most are white. Are they
racist? Only coincidentally.

Trump’s base is made up of those who believe in guns, the Second Amendment, and
government getting out of the way. They believe in the military, but think the
military is too restrictive. They believe in themselves. They know when the
apocalypse comes, they have to do it all on their own. They are ready to
survive. They wear camo.

The situation in Puerto Rico, and before that, the natural disasters in Texas
and Florida, is ready made for the Trump base to carry old 45. The situation
speaks directly to the soul of all survivalists. No one waits for a handout.
Hungry? Go shoot a squirrel and drink from a stream. No problem. Everyone else
is a pantywaist. Sympathy from a president? Please.

Meanwhile, Trump is using these cretins to develop his own brand of “survival
politics.”

In an attempt to prop up a flagging presidency that arguably has no major
accomplishments, Trump is his own best press secretary. He’s always putting
himself in the best light. So of course, “things are going well.” He doesn’t
need to bring in Sarah Huckabee Sanders or Kellyanne Conway to lie for him.

Playing to his base of survivalists who prefer him to be rough and tough, Trump
keeps his numbers from hitting rock bottom.

Therefore, we will continue to see a delusional, cold hearted Trump carry on in
this style–on everything.

After nine months of this, you should have developed some survival skills of
your own by now–like continuing to speak out.

The louder the better. And please don’t fatigue. True survivalists don’t.

**_NFL KNEELING_**

Another survivalist trait is love for country and love for the flag. So draping
oneself around the flag is a common go-to and justification for anything. It’s
an impregnable shield against all logic.  My country, love it or leave it,
right?

And that’s where this NFL knee, and overall sports knee issue, seems to be
mired.

I was all in support for the boycott of the NFL this year before the Trump
appropriation of this. (What else can you call it? He has taken the protest and
made it his own).

Last year at this time, I was firmly behind [Colin Kaepernick’s stance](/blog/emil-guillermo-hillary-clinton-donald-trump-presidential-debate-colin-kaepernick/).

![ColinKTime2.jpg](/uploads/ColinKTime2.jpg)

This year, I was in full support of Kaepernick, disgusted by how the NFL has
blackballed the quarterback simply for speaking out. His protest was never about
criticism of the flag, or even country, but over how people of color have been
treated by police and by society in general.

After appropriating and reframing the situation as a flag issue, Trump has
successfully scrambled the original debate.

Kaepernick remains unemployed, but there’s been some unity among players and
owners, and rightly so. Trump calling players who kneel “sons of bitches” is a
disgrace. It’s even more so when you consider Trump said it at a rally in the
South where calling out African Americans who stand their ground hits a nerve.

The NFL and any other sports league can solve this easily by simply nixing the
anthem from sporting events. There’s no good reason for it to signify the start
of a game. None. Why not sing the anthem at the start of the workday at U.S.
government offices? Or to end the workday before hitting Happy Hour?

But if we must continue to debate kneeling/not kneeling at pro sports events,
then it’s still just about free speech, the Constitution, and what it really
means to be American. And that is to create a unity out of all the dissonance.
Not to make the dissonant shut up.

Or shut up and stand.

That’s what the bully Trump wants. As the saying goes, “Free speech for me, but
not for thee.”

That’s not American.

CNN came out with a poll that shows a deep divide. Are athletes wrong to kneel
during the anthem? 43 percent said they were right.  49 percent said wrong.

Should the professional sports leagues require them to stand? Yes: 49 percent;
No: 49 percent.

Trump must like all those numbers. It creates a wave worth riding for the
survivalist Trump. He will keep this simple issue alive because it’s easy and
polarizing.

This is what you get from a reality star pres who knows exactly how to
manipulate an audience.

Great for ratings. Not so great for democracy.
