---
title: 'Asian American says Obamacare saved his life, in AALDEF podcast'
contributors: ["contributor/emil-guillermo.md"]

#layout: layouts/post.njk
date: 2017-01-07T22:16:11+00:00


tags:
- Affordable Care Act
- Kalwis Lo
- Obamacare
- Trump
---

As Congress got back into action last week, there was one clear-cut enemy to the
American public, but it wasn’t Vladimir Putin.

For some reason, Trump and the GOP love Putin.

But this thing called Obamacare, also known as the Affordable Care Act, Trump
and his ilk uniformly hate with a passion.

As President Obama gives his farewell address on Tuesday, it’s undeniable what
he’s done for the American people.

For Kalwis Lo, 28–born in California to Vietnamese refugees who came to the U.S.
in 1988–Obama did a lot more than anyone can imagine. The president gave him a
chance to live.

In 2011, Lo had just graduated from UC Santa Cruz and found out he had cancer.

Listen to Kalwis tell his story in my podcast interview
[here](https://bit.ly/2i78plG).

![kalwislo.jpg](/uploads/kalwislo.jpg)

In California, the state with the most Asian Americans, about 3,826,000 people
have gained health insurance through Covered CA, the California state-run
marketplace. That’s a 54% reduction in the uninsured rate, according to
Congresswoman Judy Chu (D-CA). There are also about 16 million Californians with
pre-existing conditions who could once again be denied coverage if the ACA is
repealed.

Republicans gave President Obama little chance at the start of his term in 2009.
Now that their titular head Trump is on the verge of leading the country, there
is no doubt that their priority will be to eliminate the legacy piece of
legislation of the Obama years.

Kalwis Lo can’t believe it.

“If ACA didn’t exist…no one cared that I was going to die,” Lo told me. He’s
appreciative of what Obama did and doesn’t think it’s overstating it to say the
president saved his life.  He’s scared that Trump and others seem so hell-bent
on reversing it.

Last week, Obama warned that by getting rid of the Affordable Care Act, Trump
would “make America sick again.”

Lo knows first hand that it’s far more drastic than that.

“People are going to die,” he told me.
