---
title: 'After firing Comey, Trump emerges the New Nixon'
contributors: ["contributor/emil-guillermo.md"]

#layout: layouts/post.njk
date: 2017-05-10T14:02:59+00:00


tags:
- FBI director fired
- James Comey
- John Dean
- Nixon
- Trump
- Watergate
---

Donald Trump’s classless firing of FBI director James Comey, just days after
Comey reportedly asked for more money for an investigation into the Trump
campaign and Russia, elevates the situation to historic levels.

There is only one word to describe Donald Trump going forward.

Nixonian.

Nixon’s the one who tried to cover up the Watergate scandal by firing special
prosecutor Archibald Cox on October 20, 1973, a day known as the “Saturday Night
Massacre.”

I remember that night as a college freshman wondering what was happening to our
country.

And now the parallels are striking.

![Nixon-TrumpW.jpg](/uploads/Nixon-TrumpW.jpg)

Firing the man who is investigating you and your administration? Just like Nixon
did?

Using the political “N” word to cast Trump’s villainy may have been premature
before this week.

A few months back, Trump went to Twitter one Saturday morning and suggested that
then-President Obama had wiretapped Trump Tower.

That didn’t stop former Nixon lawyer John Dean, the former White House counsel
who was charged with obstruction of justice for his role in Watergate. He went
on MSNBC in March talking about how the Trump administration seemed Nixonian.

![JohnDean73-15W.jpg](/uploads/JohnDean73-15W.jpg)

“In fact, they are in a cover-up mode. There’s just never been any question in
my mind about that,” Dean said. “I’ve been inside a cover-up. I know how they
look and feel. And every signal they’re sending is ‘we’re covering this up.'”

“This White House is not showing their innocence,” he said. “They’re showing how
damn guilty they are, is what we’re seeing.”

Since then, Comey has already shown his unwillingness to help Trump by declaring
there was no evidence to back a claim that Trump Tower was wiretapped. And then
there was his recent testimony before Congress, which coincided with reports
that he asked for more money and resources for the FBI investigation into the
Trump-Russia links.

It must have finally triggered Trump’s infamous phrase: “You’re fired.”

Great for a reality show. Lousy for a democracy.

Even the way Trump did it was a bit odd. He didn’t talk directly to Comey, who
was in Los Angeles speaking at a field agent function. Reportedly, Comey got the
dagger while TV monitors, tuned in to news stations, heralded the news on the
lower third of the screen.

Comey thought it was a prank.

![Comey2.jpg](/uploads/Comey2.jpg)

But it was just the way Trump does the presidency. And America.

This is why those who say they want the government run like a business will eat
their words.

Because Trump is running things like a capitalist authoritarian who puts his
interests above all.

It’s in his letter firing Comey.

“While I greatly appreciate you informing me, on three separate occasions, that
I am not under investigation, I nevertheless concur with the judgment of the
Department of Justice that you are not able to effectively lead the bureau,”
Trump said in a letter dated May 9, asserting his innocence as he threw Comey
under the bus.

The White House also released another letter by Attorney General Jeff Sessions
(who recused himself on all things Russia) and deputy attorney general Rod
Rosenstein, which gave Trump “cover.” That provided the pretext–the reason
that’s not the reason– that it wasn’t the Russian investigation, it was the
handling of the Clinton emails that caused the firing.

Almost plausible?

But no Clinton supporters or Democrats were pushing for Comey’s head, not now.

Clinton’s emails are old news. Candidate Trump liked the ruckus Comey caused
when it helped him win the presidency. But this Russian investigation is another
matter.

Even in the day after the news conference, White House spokesperson Sarah
Huckabee Sanders only made the swamp talk murkier, when she pointed out that
Trump was actually upset with Comey back in July.

So why now?

How about this: Getting rid of Comey allows Trump to “fix” things at the FBI
with a Trump “loyalist” who will do exactly what he’s told.

That’s more credible than Kellyanne Conway, who resurfaced on TV to defend Trump
and say it wasn’t about Russia. Conway is good on pretext though short on truth.

Even the Justice Department has come out saying that reports of Comey’s firing,
following his request for more resources for the Russia probe, is false.

But it’s too late.

Comey’s firing is about Russia, even if just by coincidence.

The emails don’t matter any longer. Russia still does. And now Trump has lost
all credibility firing the man investigating Trump’s approach to power and the
presidency.

Even moderate Republicans are questioning Trump’s timing of the Comey firing.
Why didn’t Trump do it in January, they ask? Well, he liked Comey then. But once
the FBI began to move in and work for the American people, not so much.

Now Democrats, caught by surprise, have new life. They’re demanding a special
prosecutor to be appointed to assure fairness and strict adherence to the rule
of law. They didn’t mind Comey as long as he was going after Trump.

In the meantime, the optics just aren’t working for Trump, who manages either
wittingly or unwittingly to make things worse for himself.

When Trump talked directly for the first time about why he fired Comey, his
answer was Trumpian: “Because he wasn’t doing a good job very simply, he was not
doing a good job.”

It wasn’t Nixon saying, “I am not a crook.” But the historical echo was clear as
Trump gave his answer while sitting next to Henry Kissinger, the former
Secretary of State under Nixon during Watergate.

It was the first statement on Comey for the ethically-challenged Trump–The New
Nixon.

What he’s done is far worse than the Saturday Night Massacre. And as the probe
plays out, raising issues of treason and abuse of power, we’re facing a far
greater threat to democracy than even Watergate.
