---
title: 'Green light for doubting voters–FBI clears Clinton, Trump goes back to rigged talk; Remember Mallika Das on Election Day'
contributors: ["contributor/emil-guillermo.md"]

#layout: layouts/post.njk
date: 2016-11-07T12:36:52+00:00


tags:
- Clinton
- election 2016
- Mallika Das
- Texas
- Trump
- voting rights

---

As an early bird, my vote is in the mail.

If you haven’t voted yet, vote now.

Now is always the best candidate.

Better than later.

And maybe that’s what finally got to FBI Director James Comey when he gave
everyone his November surprise.

He’s not the patron saint of voter suppression or election tampering that
everyone might think he is. .

If you were turned off to this whole electoral democracy thing because of the
FBI director’s initial letter to Congress Oct. 28 announcing a renewed
investigation into the Clinton email saga, you can come out of your weekend
football stupor with renewed faith.

On Sunday, Comey decided he’d better tell us all now, that, uh, he’s making a
U-turn.

“Based on our review, we have not changed our conclusion that we expressed in
July with respect to Secretary Clinton,” Comey said in his latest letter to
Congress, essentially affirming the clearance he gave Clinton over the matter in
the summer.

He’s still not getting an invite to the Clintons for Thanksgiving.

But maybe now Trump will change his walk-up rally song from the Rolling Stones,
“You Can’t Always Get What You Want,” to that Boy George song with the refrain,
“Comey, Comey, Comey Comey, Comey chameleon.” That Comey does come and go,
doesn’t he?

Trump’s already taken a U-turn himself from “maybe the system’s not rigged after
all” to “You can’t review 650,000 emails in 8 days.”

Not by hand.

But this is the digital age, with software rapidly scanning a single Weiner
laptop for duplicate emails.

So where were we–heading to the polls?

**_Mallika Das, protector of limited English proficient voters and voting rights
hero_** As Asian Americans, I hope as you mark your ballots you keep Mallika
Das in mind.

![mallikadas.jpg](/uploads/mallikadas.jpg)

Das, an Asian American of Indian descent, lived outside Austin, Texas in
Williamson County’s Round Rock.

In 2014, she went to vote in the Texas midterm elections, the one that featured
a contentious open gubernatorial race between Republican Attorney General Greg
Abbott and Democrat Wendy Davis.

But the ballot also featured a state proposition and other items requiring a
little more time and understanding.

Das showed up to the polls with her son, Saurabh.

![MallikaSaurabhDas.jpg](/uploads/MallikaSaurabhDas.jpg)

“She understands English and could read, but doesn’t understand to a very high
level,” her son Saurabh, a 41-year old computer specialist, told me over the
phone. “Which is why she would normally ask me to translate.”

But on that day, the election officials at the polling place refused to let
Saurabh help his mother, citing a Texas law that said to interpret, Saurabh had
to reside in the county.

Saurabh lived in neighboring Travis County.

“This is the rule, you can’t help, \[they said\], which seemed immediately
suspect to me,” said Saurabh Das. “I was angry that this had happened.”

Mallika Das did vote, but without the help she needed. She mentioned to Saurabh
she may have voted for the wrong things.

She eventually became a plaintiff in a
[lawsuit](/press-release/asian-americans-sue-texas-for-denial-of-language-assistance-under-the-voting-rights-act/)
filed by AALDEF on behalf of the Organization of Chinese Americans of Greater
Houston.

The suit argued that the Texas election law was an arbitrary restriction on the
right to vote.

Here’s how absurd the law was. Had Saurabh Das said he wanted to “assist” his
mom, he could have done that within the law (as long as he wasn’t an employer or
a union rep).

But simply by saying the word “interpreter” triggered the residency requirement.

Mallika Das and her son didn’t know the magic words to make democracy work in
Texas for those with limited English.

Last August, U.S. District Judge Robert Pitman sided with Das and said the law
was a [violation of the Voting Rights
Act](https://www.nbcnews.com/news/asian-america/federal-judge-strikes-down-texas-law-violates-voting-rights-act-n632831).

Limited English proficient voters throughout Texas can now be assured they get
the help they need to vote.

The decision came just days after what would have been Mallika Das’ milestone
60th birthday.

![MallikaAshokDas.jpg](/uploads/MallikaAshokDas.jpg)

She died on June 2nd of cancer.

Saurabh Das said had his mother lived, he’s not sure she would have understood
the full impact of her courage. He said his mother at first acted as many
immigrants, reluctant to speak out. But then he translated the legalese for his
mom.

“I had to explain \[to her\] what happened was not right,” Saurabh told me. “And
that my mom would be potentially helping a lot of people.”

That’s all it took for Mallika Das to go forward.

If you need help, the law says it will be there.

Now go vote.
