---
title: 'Sherpa fears Nepal earthquake could end climbing season on Mt. Everest (updated)'
contributors: ["contributor/emil-guillermo.md"]

#layout: layouts/post.njk
date: 2015-04-25T20:39:58+00:00


tags:
- Mount Everest
- Nepal earthquake
- Sherpa
---

Serap Jangbu Sherpa, 46, was hanging on every bit of communication from the base
camp in the Himalayas -by text, online, Facebook–when I called him on Saturday.

It was like he was hanging on the side of the mountain he loved.

![serapsherpa2.jpg](/uploads/serapsherpa2.jpg)

Serap is a premier climber who has scaled Mt. Everest three times. But it’s
tough to be a sherpa. Now he makes his living as a mountaineering consultant at
a Manhattan sports store.

 When the news broke that a 7.8 earthquake hit Nepal, Serap, the president of
 the U.S. Nepal Climbing Association, knew what that would mean.

There would be an avalanche resulting in injuries and lives lost, and maybe the
loss of the climbing season itself.

“When I heard the news I was very shocked,” he told me when I reached him at his
home in Queens. “Oh my god. What’s going on? Every year again and again. Very
big shocking news.”

He was hoping it wouldn’t be like last April when an avalanche on the mountain
killed 16 sherpa and ended the season.

By mid-morning on Saturday, the sad numbers continued to mount as the quake cut
sharply through Nepal and could be felt into neighboring areas to the east and
west.

Later, Nepalese officials confirmed to _The New York Times_ that an avalanche
slammed into a base camp, killing at least 10 climbers and injuring an untold
number of others.

Nima Namgyal Sherpa, a tour guide also at the base camp, wrote on Facebook:
“Many camps have been destroyed by the shake and wind from the avalanche,” said
Nima Sherpa, base camp manager for Asian Trekking.  “All the doctors here are
doing our best to treat and save lives.”

Still, there was optimistic talk that the trekking could resume again.

Resume again?

Hard to believe, considering the earthquake’s impact on the entire country.

And yet, for Nepal, the Himalayan expeditions are the lifeblood of the country.
It is their industry, where visitors can pay as much as $100,000 each to scale
Everest, with the government getting a huge percentage of that.

Nepal issues licenses for more than 1,000 trips a year. An earthquake at a key
time in the climbing season only multiplies  the devastation.

I asked Serap Jangbu Sherpa if the expeditions could just pick up and start
again in spite of the quake.

“I don’t think it’s going to be closed,” he said, but he added it would “take a
little while” to  create the support systems for climbs to resume.

“There’s enough time to continue,” Serap Sherpa said. “It’s still April, and we
have a month to go… but now everything is gone. I’m sure it’s a big mess…You
need enough food and supplies. Everything.”

Serap Sherpa said he lost a team member during one climb he made, and he
recommended they return home.

“I decided to cancel and come back next time,” he said. But he said sherpas
can’t always tell clients “don’t go up.”

“Some people want to continue because they spend a lot of money,” Serap Sherpa
said. “So they want to keep climbing.”

Still, that’s hard to see happening after last year’s tragic avalanche. In
protest for better conditions, sherpas shut down the mountain until their
compensation and working conditions improved.

But now an earthquake has the entire country scaling a different kind of Everest
just to care for the dead and provide aid to the massive numbers of injured.

It’s hard to imagine the country back to normal when life is difficult
everywhere you look.

Updated: Here’s a video that was on YouTube and CNN of the avalanche hitting the
base camp:

{{< youtube _JC_wIWUC2U >}}

On Apr. 26, as of 3:30 pm ET, there have been 17 confirmed dead at Mt. Everest,
and more than 2,500 confirmed dead in the the country of Nepal.
