---
title: 'ESPN Jeremy Lin Headline: Fired Employee Claims No Racism Was Intended'
authors: []

#layout: layouts/post.njk
date: 2012-02-20T13:31:19+00:00


---

![ESPN.jpg](/uploads/ESPN-thumb-240x134-392.jpg)

Huffington Post — Jeremy Lin has heard it before.

As an Asian-American basketball player struggling for years to realize his NBA
dreams, Lin has dealt with the [overt racism of Floyd Mayweather
Jr](https://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/02/13/floyd-mayweather-twitter-jeremy-lin-knicks-star_n_1274832.html?ref=jeremy-lin).
and [Jason
Whitlock](https://latimesblogs.latimes.com/sports_blog/2012/02/fox-sports-jason-whitlock-apologizes-for-jeremy-lin-tweet.html)
as well as the coded compliments of those who marvel at how “[deceptively
athletic](https://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/02/20/jeremy-lin-espn-interview-racism-kardashian-video_n_1288875.html?ref=sports)”
he can be. Having [endured racial
taunts](https://sportsillustrated.cnn.com/vault/article/magazine/MAG1194909/2/index.htm)
throughout his life on the court, Lin may have been among those least shocked by
the [offensive headline that ESPN
ran](https://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/02/18/espn-racist-jeremy-lin-headline-mobile-apology_n_1286277.html)to
accompany a story about the New York Knicks’ [loss to the New Orleans
Hornets](https://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/02/17/knicks-lose-to-hornets-jeremy-lin-streak-snapped_n_1286037.html?ref=jeremy-lin)
on Friday.

After that loss, ESPN promoted an article about the game on its mobile platforms
by pairing an image of Lin with the headline “[Chink In The
Armor](https://jimromenesko.com/2012/02/18/really-espn/).” The headline lasted
less than an hour before being swapped for “[All Good
Things…](https://outsports.com/jocktalkblog/2012/02/18/espn-uses-racial-epithet-chink-in-headline-of-jeremy-lin-story/),”
but [drew withering and widespread
criticism,](https://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/02/19/espn-apologizes-for-racis_n_1287503.html?ref=jeremy-lin)
notably from the Asian American Legal Defense and Education Fund (AALDEF). On
Saturday morning, [ESPN apologized for the offensive
headline](https://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/02/18/espn-racist-jeremy-lin-headline-mobile-apology_n_1286277.html?ref=jeremy-lin)
and promised “a complete review of our cross-platform editorial procedures.”

“[ESPN has
apologized](https://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/02/18/espn-racist-jeremy-lin-headline-mobile-apology_n_1286277.html?ref=jeremy-lin),”
[Lin said
](https://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/02/19/espn-fires-employee-jeremy-lin-headline_n_1287591.html?ref=mostpopular)
after the Knicks’ impressive win over the Dallas Mavericks on Sunday. “I don’t
think it was on purpose or whatever. At the same time, they’ve apologized, and
so from my end I don’t care anymore. You have to learn to forgive. And I don’t
even think that was intentional, or hopefully not.”

On Sunday, ESPN announced the [firing of the
editor](https://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/02/19/espn-fires-employee-jeremy-lin-headline_n_1287591.html?ref=mostpopular)
responsible for publishing the headline. [ESPN also
revealed](https://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/02/19/espn-fires-employee-jeremy-lin-headline_n_1287591.html?ref=mostpopular)
that disciplinary action had been taken against an ESPN News anchor who had
[previously used the same
phrase](https://www.mmamania.com/2012/2/20/2811740/jeremy-lin-espn-max-bretos-headline-mma-live-knicks-mma)
while [discussing Lin’s meteoric
rise](https://thebiglead.com/index.php/2012/02/19/yes-an-espn-tv-anchor-used-chink-in-his-armor-when-talking-about-jeremy-lin-earlier-this-week/)
with Knicks broadcaster and NBA Hall of Famer Walt Frazier.

The former ESPN employee, Anthony Frederico, responsible for publishing the
offensive headline [spoke with the _Daily
News_,](https://www.nydailynews.com/sports/basketball/knicks/jeremy-lin-slur-honest-mistake-fired-espn-editor-anthony-federico-claims-article-1.1025566)
both to apologize for any harm done but also to claim that he had not used the
phrase with any racial motivation.

“This had nothing to do with me being cute or punny,” [Anthony Federico told the
Daily
News](https://www.nydailynews.com/sports/basketball/knicks/jeremy-lin-slur-honest-mistake-fired-espn-editor-anthony-federico-claims-article-1.1025566).
“I’m so sorry that I offended people. I’m so sorry if I offended Jeremy.”

Frederico claimed to the _Daily News_ that his choice of the [oft-used sports
cliche](https://www.theatlanticwire.com/entertainment/2012/02/espns-jeremy-lin-headline-racist-or-just-cliche-sist/48889/)
was an “honest mistake” and not intended to make light of a racial slur used
against Asians.

On Monday, California [congresswoman Judy Chu](https://chu.house.gov/), the first
Chinese-American woman [elected to
Congress](https://articles.latimes.com/2009/jul/16/local/me-judy-chu16),
addressed the ESPN headline during an [appearance on
MSNBC](https://twitter.com/#%21/RepJudyChu/status/171418267364237312).

“I think that the use of the term is appalling and offensive,” [Chu said on
MSNBC](https://www.politico.com/news/stories/0212/73077.html). “The ‘c’ word is
for Asian Americans like the ‘n’ word is for African Americans.”

Less than 24 hours after ESPN’s headline, [“Saturday Night Live” addressed
Linsanity](https://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/02/19/jeremy-lin-snl-racist-jokes-linsanity_n_1287649.html)
in its opening sketch, focusing on the overuse of puns as well as the prevalence
of racial stereotypes in media commentary about the Knicks’ point guard. Aside
from calling out various members of the media — ESPN, the _New York Post_ and
MSG — for offensive references to Lin, the sketch not-so-subtly suggested that
there is the sort of double standard at work that congresswoman Chu would later
refer to during her appearance on MSNBC.

Huffington Post — According to a [former Harvard
teammate](https://www.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,1953708,00.html#ixzz1mkfzZLS7),
Lin was previously taunted with the C-word during his Ivy League days and dealt
with other racist gibes, such as the time when someone in the stands yelled
“sweet-and-sour pork” when the Crimson were taking on Georgetown on the road.

So, whether the headline was intentionally offensive or not, Lin has certainly
heard many of these things before. And, sadly, he may very well hear it again.

By Chris Greenberg

[Read this article at the Huffington Post][1]

[1]: https://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/02/20/espn-jeremy-lin-racist-headline-apology-editor_n_1289093.html?ref=sports
