---
title: Hate Crime For Rutgers Outers?
contributors: ["contributor/emil-guillermo.md"]

#layout: layouts/post.njk
date: 2010-10-21T13:21:12+00:00



---

While we wait to see if New Jersey prosecutors will pursue hate crime
enhancements against Dharun Ravi and Molly Wei in connection with the outing of
Rutgers student Tyler Clementi, is there anyone out there in the community who
may want to see this with a more positive spin?

Just think, after years of being saddled with that “model minority” stereotype
we can now breathe a sigh of relief. There on the front pages we have living
examples of college-age Asian Americans behaving badly.

See, we really are more well-rounded than that standard issue Asian geek cum
nerd image. We are capable of so much less.

Doesn’t that make you feel better?  So much for uplift.

That leaves us with the only positive for Ravi and Wei: once all the facts are
in, I see it unlikely that what they are alleged to have done constitutes a bias
crime.

At this point, Ravi and Wei face charges based on the New Jersey law prohibiting
the transmitting of sexual images and content without a person’s consent.
Maximum prison term? Five years. Likely they’ll get less. Want an enhancement?
Take away internet, cell phones and gadgets. Ouch.

Now that’s harsh, dude.

Still see it as a bullying/bias crime?  Sure, what happened in the aftermath,
Clementi’s suicide is tragic.  But put the basic facts to a simple test:
Clementi was gay, but would Ravi and Wei do what they did to a straight
roommate?  In place of Tyler Clementi, insert one _Joe_ _Jock- BMOC_, who gets
set up with a tranny or a prostitute or an inflatable doll. (You make the call.)

You think Ravi and Wei would have the webcam on? Of course they would, because
the only bias they have is for something more interesting than their own boring
lives. In the end, what motivated the Rutgers Deux isn’t the gayness, the
sexiness, or anything remotely human.

These kids aren’t really voyeurs or sex deviants. Nor are they homophobes.
They’re technophiliacs. I’m coining the term to define people with an irrational
love of technology, where the love of technology is greater than the love of
humanity. Where kindness is lost and never a consideration. The only thing that
matters: _Hey, I can do THAT with THIS GADGET? That IS SOOOO cool._

Call it “Plug and Play” morality.

When you’re cut off from human feelings, cool is all you need. Ravi and Wei were
both way cool, sadly.

The comic Flip Wilson used to parade in drag as _Geraldine_, and proclaim, “_The
devil made_ _me_ _do it._”  With Plug and Play values, it’s “the technology made
me do it.” That’s not a hate crime. That’s just a _crime_ crime.

So no hate crime enhancements. But if I were judge and jury, I’d just take away
all their toys. Cell phones. Webcams. Slingboxes. For life.

I’d give them typewriters to do their term papers. Rolls of quarters for pay
phones. 8-track tapes for their music. I’d strip them of their Kindles. Then
throw the book at them.
