---
title: Lowe’s hits new lows in corporate responsibility
contributors: ["contributor/emil-guillermo.md"]

#layout: layouts/post.njk
date: 2011-12-14T11:12:42+00:00


tags:
- All American Muslim
- "Lowe's"
- Ted Lieu
- TLC
---

As of this week, I’m not buying my screws from Lowe’s anymore, though there must
be a surplus of loose screws back at the home office.

The home improvement chain sure has a strange way of celebrating America’s
diversity.

“Duck and cover” may have worked in the 1950s for air raids and earthquakes.
It’s not supposed to be the way a modern company addresses the New America–which
last I checked is home to between five and eight million Muslims.

The move by Lowe’s to pull its ads from TLC’s reality TV show, “All-American
Muslim,” is such a strange response from the corporate giant. It’s so retro and
closed-minded in its avoidance of controversy.

Of course, it’s Lowe’s, not the United Nations. All it wants to do is sell a few
screws, right?

And all it took to get Lowe’s to pull its ads was a little pressure from those
known Islamaphobes, the Florida Family Association. The Tampa-based Christian
group claimed the show was “propaganda” to counter the Association’s own
narrow-minded propaganda that Muslims are promoting Islamic fundamentalism and
Sharia Law.

Have you seen the show?

It’s not exactly a Ken Burns documentary, but it’s not “Jersey Shore” either.
It’s a glimpse of life most Americans don’t see. Just the thing to balance the
righteous ignorance of xenophobes like the Florida Family Association.

In that sense, the show’s more public service than anything else. Unless you’re
planning a trip to Dearborn, Michigan, say to visit to the Arab American Museum
(which I did this past summer). Then you can have the American Muslim experience
first-hand.

Don’t you want to know your Muslim neighbors? The show is no more proselytizing
than what is becoming a normal NFL scene on TV on Sundays: Denver Broncos
quarterback Tim Tebow taking a knee and looking to the skies after a last-second
victory.

The TLC show merely sheds some light.

But Lowe’s doesn’t want to provide the bulbs.

It’s surely not the fight it wants. It’s into home improvement, not societal
improvement.  Race relations? Sorry, not in that aisle.

Lowe’s is mostly big-time into its own capital improvement. It doesn’t want to
upset anyone. Shareholder value is all that matters, and that means duck any
controversy by any means necessary.

Lowe’s response has been surprisingly meek with a modern non-apology on the
place for passive commitments, Facebook:

“_Lowe’s has received a significant amount of communication on this program from
every perspective possible. Individuals and groups have strong political and
societal views on this topic, and this program became a lightning rod for many
of those views. As a result, we did pull our advertising on this program_.”

How’s that for the cowardice of capitalism? Although what did you expect, Lowe’s
trotting out a company spokesperson named Al Jazeera?

I’m not much for boycotts, but this does call for a bit of selective shopping.
How else do you debate _corporate style_? You either own stock shares, and
disrupt the annual meeting. Or you’re a consumer and you vote your
conscience—with your wallet.

It’s interesting that the most outspoken public voice on this so far has been
California State Senator Ted Lieu (D-Torrance). He’s right to go amok on this,
calling Lowe’s decision “bigoted, shameful, and un-American.”

But interestingly, there are too many others in America who echo the Florida
Family Association.

To rise above the din, we must shop elsewhere.

And while you’re at it, why just focus on Lowe’s?

The Muslim Public Affairs Council has a full list of companies that the Florida
Family Association claims have pulled ads from TLC because of “All-American
Muslim:”
<https://www.mpac.org/issues/islamophobia/action-alert-stop-bigots-from-pressuring-advertisers-for-tlcs-all-american-muslim.php>

The list includes companies like Dell, Capital One, Honda, HTC phones, Ikea, JC
Penney, Estee Lauder (Clinique), McDonald’s, Nationwide Insurance, Petsmart, Old
Navy, to name just a few.

This is the debate corporate America would rather fight. To them, it’s just
dollars and sense.

To communities of color, it’s so much more.

So put Lowe’s at the bottom of your list.

We don’t need the screws.
