---
title: Many Languages, One Democracy
authors: []

#layout: layouts/post.njk
date: 2011-10-21T11:46:59+00:00


---

![voters.jpg](/uploads/voters.jpg)

Huffington Post — Participation in the democratic process takes many forms, but
perhaps none is accorded as much importance as voting. For the many new
Americans in our country, one significant barrier to exercising this important
democratic right was reduced last week when the Census Bureau issued the [newest
list of
jurisdictions](https://www.census.gov/rdo/data/voting_rights_determination_file.html)
in which language assistance must be provided during elections for individuals
whose English language skills may limit them from participating fully in the
electoral process. This year’s list, while it covers only 3.1 percent of the
counties and civil divisions in our country, will increase the ability of nearly
20 million U.S. citizens from the American Indian/Alaskan native, Asian
American, and Latino communities to exercise their right to participate in the
democratic process. Language access is a significant deterrent at the polls, and
the provisions in [Section 203 of the Voting Rights
Act](https://www.justice.gov/crt/about/vot/sec_203/activ_203.php) recognized that
reducing this barrier can engage more Americans in the political process.

Although language assistance, in the form of bilingual poll workers and ballots,
will make the path to participation smoother in the 2012 elections and beyond,
many new Americans remain unaware that this assistance is available. Getting new
Americans to the polls, and ensuring that they know to ask for language
assistance when they arrive, is a heavy lift that community organizations and
civic engagement groups must bear. Groups like the [Asian American Legal Defense
and Education Fund](https://aaldef.org/) and the [Mexican American Legal Defense
and Education Fund](https://www.maldef.org/) have deployed volunteers at polling
sites likely to draw immigrant voters and offered case assistance to those whose
right to language access is violated on Election Day.

Election Day can be a significant milestone in new American participation, but
the road to that important event is paved with strong commitment and targeted
resources that help our country’s newest citizens understand their rights and
obligations to the democratic process. For example, growth in Latino populations
in the Aleutians East Borough, AK and in Fairfax County, VA mean that those
communities will benefit from Spanish-language assistance, which may help to
increase Latino voter registration. Nationally, only [11 million of the 21.3
million](https://www.census.gov/hhes/www/socdemo/voting/publications/p20/2010/tables.html)
eligible Latino voters are actually registered. Additionally, the creation of
language assistance in Hamtramck, MI (Bengali), Clark County, Nevada (Tagalog)
and Quincy City, Massachusetts (Chinese) can prompt some of the country’s [7.6
eligible Asian American voters to
register](https://www.census.gov/hhes/www/socdemo/voting/publications/p20/2010/tables.html)
and vote. At this time, only 3.8 are registered.

All of us with roots in the immigrant community, personal or professional, bear
the responsibility of preparing our friends, family, neighbors and colleagues to
be full participants in the civic and political processes of our country — from
registering to vote to requesting language-specific support at the polls. That
responsibility begins today and never ends.

[Sayu Bhojwani for The Hufington Post >][1]

Image: Kevin Coles

[1]: https://www.huffingtonpost.com/sayu-bhojwani/many-languages-one-democr_b_1023241.html
