---
title: New districts cannot divide immigrant neighborhoods in Queens, advocates say
authors: []

#layout: layouts/post.njk
date: 2011-09-09T14:28:57+00:00


---

![chinatown.jpg](/uploads/chinatown.jpg)

NY Daily News — State officials must draw new district lines that give growing
Queens immigrant groups a stronger voice, advocates demanded this week during a
nearly six-hour public hearing.

A joint Senate-Assembly body that oversees redistricting has held public
sessions throughout New York since July – and the meeting Wednesday in Queens
drew one of the largest crowds in the state.

“There’s a constant need to pay attention to new immigrant enclaves,” said state
Sen. Michael Gianaris (D-Astoria), who testified at the hearing. “It’s our
obligation to do what we can to integrate them into society and into government,
and the best way to do that … is to unite them as a community of interest.”

States across the country are preparing to redraw district lines based on Census
2010 data. At Queens Borough Hall, nearly 100 speakers asked the state to avoid
gerrymandering politics and instead use the demographic statistics to draw
boundaries.

“The Asian-American community spoke together with one voice,” said Jerry
Vattamala, a staff attorney with the Asian-American Legal Defense and Education
Fund, which is part of a coalition of local Asian groups advocating for fair
redistricting. “We suffered for 10 years with current district lines. It would
be unbearable to suffer another 10.”

In Queens, which the Census Bureau tallied at around 2.2 million, growing Asian
populations have been fractured, making it difficult for them to get the
attention they need, advocates said.

“We’re supposed to have a system where voters choose representatives, not one
where representatives choose their voters,” said Gianaris.

The government watchdog group Common Cause is crunching numbers to make its own
recommendations for district lines.

“There have been some substantial shifts in the demographic picture of Queens
over the last 10 years,” said Susan Lerner, executive director of Common
Cause/NY. “That really should require significant adjustments.”

The Asian population in New York has grown 36% since 2000, said James Hong, of
the Flushing-based MinKwon Center for Community Action, which is spearheading
the newly formed Asian-American Community Coalition on Redistricting and
Democracy.

Residents need more opportunities to have their voices heard, he said.

The state has done extensive outreach for the hearings, said a spokesman for
Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver’s office.

After these public sessions end in October, the state will draw maps and launch
a second round of hearings, though there is not yet a specific timeline.

Elizabeth OuYang, president of the New York chapter of the Organization of
Chinese Americans, said she hopes to meet with state officials after multiple
letters she wrote to the task force went unanswered.

“It was very disheartening,” she said. “This is not, by any stretch of the
imagination, meaningful access.”

Sam Levin, New York Daily News

This post originally appeared at the [New York Daily News](https://articles.nydailynews.com/2011-09-09/local/30151624_1_asian-american-community-coalition-district-lines-minkwon-center). Image credit: [missmeng](https://www.flickr.com/photos/missmeng/5384585047/)/Flickr
