---
title: Over 160 Asian American and Pacific Islander groups file amicus briefs in U.S.
  Supreme Court in support of affirmative action
authors: []
#layout: layouts/post.njk
date: 2015-11-03T10:59:00+0000
related_programs: []
link_to_original: ''
images: []

---
The Asian American Legal Defense and Education Fund (AALDEF), Asian Americans
Advancing Justice (Advancing Justice), and the National Asian Pacific American
Bar Association (NAPABA), have filed three separate _amicus_ briefs urging the
nation’s highest court to uphold University of Texas at Austin’s (UT-Austin)
affirmative action policy.

Together, the briefs represent over 160 organizations in support of equal
opportunity and affirmative action in higher education, representing the
tremendous diversity within Asian American and Pacific Islander (AAPI)
communities, including Arab, Filipino, Japanese, Chinese, Korean, South Asian,
Southeast Asian, and Pacific Islander organizations. In addition, the briefs
represent 53 individuals, including higher education faculty and officials.

“With long histories of serving the most vulnerable members of our community,
these organizations range from large, pan-Asian national organizations and
professional associations, to student and grassroots groups,” says Laboni Hoq,
litigation director at Advancing Justice – Los Angeles. “Such broad support for
race conscious admissions policies sends a clear message that AAPIs
overwhelmingly support these policies and will not be used as a racial wedge to
disenfranchise other communities of color.”

The _amicus_ brief filed by Advancing Justice argues that an applicant cannot be
evaluated holistically without the consideration of race. In UT-Austin’s
holistic review program, where test scores play a dominant role in the
admissions process, it is even more crucial to consider race because these tests
disproportionately limit access to educational opportunities for minority
students. The brief also shows how race conscious admissions programs opened the
doors of higher education for AAPI students after a century of discrimination
and exclusion and continue to benefit many AAPI students who face significant
educational barriers today.

A closer look at disaggregated data reveals large disparities in educational
attainment among Asian American ethnic groups. Based on U.S. Census Bureau data,
the educational attainment of Hmong, Cambodian, Laotian, and Vietnamese
Americans is the lowest among Asian American ethnic groups and similar to those
of Latinos and African Americans. Only 61 percent of Hmong Americans hold a high
school diploma, while only 12 percent of Laotian Americans have graduated from
college.

“Supporters of Fisher have mischaracterized UT-Austin’s race-conscious
admissions policy. It can benefit Asian Americans through an individualized
review of applicants that avoids harmful stereotypes based on the ‘model
minority’ myth,” says AALDEF Executive Director Margaret Fung.

As summarized in AALDEF’s _amicus_ brief: “Asian Americans and Pacific
Islanders–a unique cross-section of identities and experiences that spans a
range of comparative privilege and disadvantage–benefit from this individualized
approach to admissions, as do African Americans, Latinos, and Whites.” The
AALDEF _amicus_ brief also distinguishes between the two distinct concepts of
negative action and affirmative action, noting there is no evidence in the
record of discrimination by UT-Austin.

“We recognize that Asian Pacific Americans, like other groups, have endured
cases of discrimination and lack of opportunities which continue to impact us
today. The low numbers of minority groups in the legal profession, government,
and corporate leadership underscore the need to remove barriers to higher
education and increase diversity,” says George C. Chen, president of NAPABA.
“Courtrooms, law firms, and law schools must be filled with people of different
backgrounds so that we can better understand and respect the diversity of the
American public.”

In 2013, the U.S. Supreme Court reaffirmed that universities may consider race
as part of a holistic review process to increase racial diversity on campus.
When instructed to look more carefully at whether UT-Austin tried other methods
of achieving greater racial diversity before considering race, the 5th Circuit
determined that UT-Austin’s efforts to increase racial diversity through
race-neutral means (e.g. “Top Ten Percent” Plan) did not result in the
qualitative diversity that it sought, and therefore upheld the University’s use
of race as a factor in its holistic admissions policy. Fisher appealed this
decision forcing a second hearing of the case by the U.S. Supreme Court in
December.

The Asian American Advancing Justice (Advancing Justice) _amicus_ brief
represents 141 Asian American organizations, student groups, and bar
associations, as well as, 9 members of academia. Caldwell Leslie & Proctor, PC
served as pro-bono co-counsel. For a copy, visit
[www.advancingjustice-la.org](https://www.napaba.org).

The Asian American Legal Defense and Education Fund (AALDEF) amicus brief
represents 21 Asian American education and youth-serving groups, including the
Asian/Asian American Faculty and Staff Association and the Asian Desi Pacific
Islander American Collective at UT-Austin, and 44 higher education faculty and
officials. Foley Hoag LLP served as pro-bono co-counsel. For a copy, visit
[https://aaldef.org](/uploads/pdf/AALDEFfisher2Amicus.pdf).

The National Asian Pacific American Bar Association (NAPABA) amicus brief, filed
by the Coalition of Bar Associations of Color (CBAC), consisting of NAPABA, the
Hispanic National Bar Association (HNBA), the National Bar Association (NBA),
and the National Native American Bar Association (NNABA), highlights the
importance of race conscious admissions policies in order to preserve a diverse
pipeline of individuals into the legal profession. For a copy, visit,
[www.napaba.org](https://www.napaba.org).

Asian Americans Advancing Justice (Advancing Justice) is a national affiliation
of five leading organizations advocating for the civil and human rights of Asian
Americans and other underserved communities to promote a fair and equitable
society for all. The affiliation’s members are: Advancing Justice – AAJC
(Washington, D.C.), Advancing Justice – Asian Law Caucus (San Francisco),
Advancing Justice – Atlanta, Advancing Justice – Chicago, and Advancing Justice –
Los Angeles.

The Asian American Legal Defense and Education Fund (AALDEF), founded in 1974,
is a national organization that protects and promotes the civil rights of Asian
Americans. By combining litigation, advocacy, education, and organizing, AALDEF
works with Asian American communities across the country to secure human rights
for all.

The National Asian Pacific American Bar Association (NAPABA) is the national
association of Asian Pacific American attorneys, judges, law professors, and law
students. NAPABA represents the interests of approximately 50,000 attorneys and
approximately 75 national, state, and local Asian Pacific American bar
associations. NAPABA continues to be a leader in addressing civil rights issues
confronting Asian Pacific American communities. Through its national network of
committees and affiliates, NAPABA provides a strong voice for increased
diversity of the federal and state judiciaries, advocates for equal opportunity
in the workplace, works to eliminate hate crimes and anti-immigrant sentiment,
and promotes the professional development of people of color in the legal
profession.

**For more information, contact:**  
Ken Kimerling, Legal Director  
212\.966.5932  
[kkimerling@aaldef.org](kkimerling@aaldef.org)