---
title: 'The immigration distraction: IRS, AP, Benghazi scandals dominate news, but advocates remain optimistic'
contributors: ["contributor/emil-guillermo.md"]

#layout: layouts/post.njk
date: 2013-05-17T14:54:18+00:00


tags:
- family unification
- immigration
- Mazie Hirono
---

This just in–well, not really, but you may not have heard it in the news since
it has nothing to do with the IRS, the AP, Benghazi, or Angelina Jolie’s
voluntary double mastectomy.

A bipartisan group in the House revealed late on May 16 that it has reached an
immigration deal in principle. Aides told reporters the on-again, off-again deal
is definitely on, but would be more conservative than the Senate proposal and
likely require a longer 15-year pathway to citizenship.

The House bill might even require undocumented immigrants to sign an admission
that they violated U.S. immigration laws–which sounds like a written confession,
but without the “Our Fathers” and “Hail Marys.”

The details will be introduced in June, unless any congressional staffers
involved are faithful members of Leakers Anonymous.

And how precisely can anything in Washington be totally leak-free?

I’ll bet we see actual details of the House deal before another executive of the
IRS resigns.

Maybe the idea of the gargantuan battle of dueling immigration bills will be
enough to overcome the three-headed scandals plaguing the Obama Administration
and dominating the news.

Let’s hope so.

This week, after all the coverage of congressional hearings and discussion on
everything other than immigration, the president reportedly said he didn’t think
he had such a bad week at all.

So I guess the bad week really belongs to the 11 million undocumented and the
tens of millions more in this country who really had hopes for meaningful
immigration reform, right?

Not so fast green-card breath.

I just got off a conference call with immigration advocates and heard nothing
but optimism.

Apparently, all those White House scandals aren’t bad news for immigration
reform at all. They might even be distracting the people who would be derailing
immigration reform (Tea Party folks know who you are. They’re the ones who think
all the White House scandals add up to Christmas in May. Now they don’t have to
be appallingly xenophobic. Besides, the GOP needs immigration to avoid
oblivion.)

So while the natural opponents of immigration make hay somewhere else, work is
actually getting done.

“The process is moving smoothly; the Senators are doing their jobs,” said Patty
Kupfer, managing director of America’s Voice Education Fund, about the work by
the Senate Judiciary Subcommittee this week.

Angela Kelley of Center for American Progress called it “stunning progress” with
the “integrity of the deal holding strong.”

She even referred to the House deal as a “head-snapping moment.”

Said Kelly: “It really feels like this is a commitment by Congress to get this
done, and less of a White House priority …It’s not being driven in the same way
that you’ve seen the White House drive other legislative efforts…it’s owned by
Congress.”

Discount any talk of immigration reform being derailed. The most ardent
supporters appear to be thrilled.

Still, without scandal, the week would have started with some real momentum,
celebrating the weekend
[resignation](https://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/post-politics/wp/2013/05/10/jason-richwine-resigns-from-heritage-foundation/)
of the author of that much-ballyhooed Heritage Foundation report—the one that
said the Senate immigration bill would cost the U.S. a whopping $6.3 trillion.
(Pretty damaging, had it not come from an author who once wrote that Hispanic
immigrants with low-IQs would mean future generations of low-IQs.)

We may even finally get the broad conservative embrace of immigration as a true
free-marketer’s dream.

But weren’t you wondering when any mention of the immigration markup might
actually surface in the news?

It was barely covered in the mainstream media.

With hundreds of amendments, there was one bellwether-type amendment that
failed.

It was the one proposed by Sen. Jeff Sessions (R-AL) that would have crippled
the plan by limiting the flow of immigrants and foreign workers to 33 million
over ten years, and the total number of green cards to 1.2 million a year.

That it failed resoundingly by 17-1, with only Sessions voting for it, showed
there really was some sanity in the room. (To prove it, amendments to speed up
the use of the onerous E-Verify and a biometric tracking device were also
defeated.)

Let’s hope the tone remains steady in the coming week. On Monday, the Senate
subcommittee is scheduled to conduct a marathon session on what remains of more
than 300 amendments.

Of significance to Asian Americans are the family unification amendments offered
by Hawaii’s Senator Mazie Hirono.

There’s “Hirono 5,” which authorizes U.S. citizens and permanent residents to
sponsor up to two members of their extended family to immigrate to the U.S. if
they have not previously sponsored any other family members.

But the key Hirono amendments (6, 7, 8) are the ones that seek to retain visa
categories for older married sons and daughters, as well as siblings.

A letter signed by groups that support Hirono’s efforts has been circulated.

And this is where I’ve said the whole immigration compromise really cuts to the
bone. If Hirono’s amendments fail, then we’re definitely moving from a
family-oriented immigration system to a merit-based one that really focuses on
corporate and employer concerns and makes applying for citizenship akin to
applying to an Ivy League America.

I’ll say this, if the family values aren’t restored and reform continues without
Hirono’s changes, they might as well begin sandblasting the Statue of Liberty.

There was nothing wrong with my father’s or your father’s immigration. Huddled
masses? This is the New America. We don’t want your huddled masses yearning to
breathe free. Not even if you’ve got blood ties. Only huddled engineers and STEM
workers need apply.

Is that really the kind of immigration reform we want?
