---
title: The Majority of Asian Americans Support Race-Conscious Admissions Policies
authors: []
#layout: layouts/post.njk
date: 2012-06-25T08:53:15+0000
related_programs: []
link_to_original: ''
images: []

---
![240](/uploads/240_NAEEA.jpg)

In anticipation of the upcoming U.S. Supreme Court case Fisher v. University of
Texas at Austin, the Asian Pacific Americans in Higher Education (APAHE) and
National Commission on Asian American and Pacific Islander Research in Education
(CARE) have released policy papers examining Asian American support for
race-conscious policies. Both papers cite multiple surveys of Asian Americans
that consistently demonstrate that a majority of Asian Americans oppose
abolishing race-conscious admissions policies. Furthermore, both papers identify
fatal flaws underlying claims in one recent amicus brief to the Supreme Court
that relied upon a survey of Asian Americans and race-conscious policies that
dramatically departed from accepted methodological standards and yielded results
at odds with the weight of available evidence.

“We support the current law that race can be one of many factors colleges
consider to attain campus diversity,” said Margaret Fung, Executive Director of
the Asian American Legal Defense and Education Fund (AALDEF), which announced
that it will be filing an amicus brief in Fisher, urging the Supreme Court to
uphold UT-Austin’s race-conscious policies. “We believe the Asian American
community continues to support policies that promote equal educational
opportunity.”

The APAHE paper cites a Voter News Service/Los Angeles Times poll which found
that a majority of Asian Americans demonstrated support for race-conscious
admissions policies by rejecting Proposition 209 in California, a measure that
prohibited public universities from considering race in admissions: “Polls by
the Voter News Service/L.A. Times and the Field Institute reveal that among
Asian American voters, support for Prop 209 was only in the range of 39% to
44%.” AALDEF’s exit polls also found that 75% of Asian American voters in
Michigan rejected Michigan’s Proposal 2, a similar state referendum seeking to
ban race-conscious policies.

The CARE paper presents results of a multi-city survey of Asian Americans by the
Inter-University Consortium for Political and Social Research, where 63.1% of
Asian Americans indicated that affirmative action “is a good thing” as opposed
to 5.7% who reported that it is a “bad thing” and 18.6% who reported that it
“doesn’t affect Asian Americans.”

Given this data’s consistency, the APAHE paper finds “frankly impossible” the
claim of political action group 80-20 National Education Foundation (80-20) that
Asian American respondents oppose affirmative action by a ratio of 52:1. 80-20,
which filed its own amicus brief opposing race-conscious policies in Fisher,
bases these claims on a web survey it sponsored. Ethical and research flaws
leading to the lopsided results – including 80-20’s political bias and
“unethical practice” of publicizing the full name and race of all participants
on its website — are detailed in both papers.

According to the Federal Judicial Center’s (the research and education agency
for the federal courts) Reference Manual on Scientific Evidence cited in the
APAHE paper, “self-selected pseudosurveys resemble reader polls published in
magazines and do not meet standard criteria for legitimate surveys admissible in
court.”

“As someone who has long championed and advocated for the rights of Asian
Americans in higher education, I am deeply concerned about 80-20’s position on
this issue,” said Dr. Bob Suzuki, President Emeritus of California State
Polytechnic University, Pomona. “Based on my experience in higher education for
some 33 years, I know that race-conscious policies have provided greater equal
opportunity for the vast majority of Asian Americans, not only for students, but
also for faculty and staff. As the APAHE and CARE papers indicate, 80-20’s
arguments are seriously flawed and must be challenged.”

Last week, the Pew Center issued a national report on Asian Americans which
correspondingly found that the number of Asian Americans who believe they are
discriminated against under the current admissions policies is extremely low. A
majority of participants (61%) believed that being Asian has no impact in
collegiate admissions, and most of the remainder (20%) believed that being Asian
can be a helpful factor. Only 12% believed it hurts to be an Asian applicant.

“As with any complex issue, the diverse Asian American community has a wide
range of opinions on the issue of race-conscious admissions policies. Both the
APAHE and CARE papers provide clarity on the Asian American community amid much
misinformation,” said Khin Mai Aung, director of AALDEF’s Educational Equity
Program.

The APAHE paper was drafted by APAHE board member William Kidder, who is also
the Assistant Executive Vice Chancellor at the University of California
Riverside.

[Download the APAHE paper](/uploads/pdf/APAHE%20Policy%20Brief.pdf) (pdf)

The CARE paper was authored by CARE Principal Investigator Robert T. Teranishi,
who is an associate professor of higher education at New York University and
author of Asians in the Ivory Tower: Dilemmas of Racial Inequality in American
Higher Education.

[Download the CARE paper](/uploads/pdf/CARE%20Policy%20Brief.pdf) (pdf)
  
**Contact:**

Ujala Sehgal  
Asian American Legal Defense and Education Fund  
212\.966.5932 ex.217  
[usehgal@aaldef.org](mailto:usehgal@aaldef.org)