---
title: The Koch Brothers, ALEC and the Savage Assault on Democracy
authors: []

#layout: layouts/post.njk
date: 2011-12-09T14:49:53+00:00


---

![SFF.JPG](/uploads/SFF.JPG)

The Nation — Billionaire brothers Charles and David Koch finally got their way
in 2011. After their decades of funding the [American Legislative Exchange
Council][1],  the collaboration between multinational corporations and
conservative state legislators, the project began finally to yield the intended
result.

For the first time in decades, the United States saw [a steady dismantling of
the laws, regulations, programs and practices put in place to make real the
promise of American democracy.][2]

That is why, on Saturday, [civil rights groups and their allies will rally
outside the New York headquarters of the Koch brothers][3] to begin a march for
the renewal of voting rights in America.

For the [Koch brothers and their kind][4], less democracy is better. They fund
campaigns with millions of dollars in checks that have helped elect the likes of
Wisconsin Governor Scott Walker and Ohio Governor John Kasich. And ALEC has made
it clear, through its ambitious “[Public Safety and Elections Task Force][5],”
that while it wants to dismantle any barriers to corporate cash and billionaire
bucks’ influencing elections, it wants very much to erect barriers to the
primary tool that Americans who are not CEOs have to influence the politics and
the government of the nation: voting.

That crude calculus, usually cloaked in bureaucracy and back-room dealmaking,
came into full view in 2011. Across the country, and to a greater extent than at
any time since the last days of Southern resistance to desegregation, voting
rights were being systematically diminished rather than expanded.

ALEC has been organizing and promoting the assault, [encouraging its legislative
minions to enact rigid Voter ID laws][5] and related attacks on voting rights in
more than three dozen states.

With their requirements that the millions of Americans who lack driver’s
licenses and other forms of official paperwork go out and purchase
identification cards in order to cast ballots, the Voter ID push put in place
new variations on an old evil: the poll tax.

“We are in the midst of the greatest coordinated legislative attack on voting
rights since the dawn of Jim Crow,” says [NAACP][2]

President Benjamin Jealous. “Voter ID laws are nothing but reincarnated poll
taxes and liter acy tests, and ex-felon voting bans serve the same purpose today
as when they were created in the wake of the Fifteenth Amendment guaranteeing
ex-slaves the vote–suppressing voting numbers among people of color.”

Voter ID laws represent only the beginning of the assault on voter rights. In
states across the country in 2011, conservative governors and legislators who
had swept to power in the 2010 election moved to restrict access to the polls in
other ways. They ended election-day registration programs in state such as
Maine, ending a practice that had allowed new voters to come to the polls, fill
out a simple form and cast a ballot. They restricted early voting in states such
as Ohio, making it dramatically harder for citizens to cast ballots in the
run-up to an election. They scrapped weekend voting in Ohio, where working men
and women had been able to cast ballots on their days off. They placed new
restrictions on voting by students at colleges and technical schools, even going
so far in Wisconsin as to move the primary election date to when most students
were on summer break. They reduced the number of polling places in some states,
making it harder for voters who lack transportation to get to the polls. And
after they established the Voter ID requirements in Wisconsin, and said that
citizens had to go to the Department of Motor Vehicles to get the proper
paperwork, they tried to reduce the number of DMV offices.

“For nearly a century, there were Jim Crow laws in place that discouraged people
of color from voting, explains Wade Henderson, the president and CEO of the
Leadership Council on Civil and Human Rights. “Today, there are different laws,
but the objective is the same–to prevent millions from exercising their right to
vote.”

No one who is serious about voting and elections misses the point of the
project. The point is not just to make it harder to vote. The point is to make
it harder for citizens to elect legislators, governors, members of

Congress and presidents who will regulate and tax multinational corporations
such as Koch Industries, while at the same time establishing programs that meet
the needs of the great mass of Americans. “Now, just as before, they are seeking
to block us from voting in order to make it easier to come after our other
rights,” says Mike Mulgrew, president of the United Federation of Teachers.

“Everything we care about is at stake, from the right to a quality education to
the right to a fair wage.”

It is with all of this in mind that the NAACP, the National Council of La Raza,
the Asian American Legal Defense & Education Fund and allied civil rights and
civil liberties organizations, churches and unions have endorsed [the “Stand for
Freedom” voting rights campaign][3], which will launch with a march Saturday
from the offices of the Koch brothers to the United Nations. At the United
Nations, the groups will mark Human Rights Day by calling for an end to assaults
on voting rights in the United States.

The choice of the [Koch brothers office as a starting point is not symbolic][6].
It is practical. For decades, the Koch brothers and their foundation have funded
ALEC and other groups that are now driving the attack on voting rights in states
across the country.

The people are pushing back. In November, Mainers voted by an overwhelming
margin to restore election-day registration. In other states, voting rights has
become a central political issue. And, now, that issue is being raised at the
headquarters of the Koch brothers–and the United Nations.

“From the beginning of our nation’s founding, Americans have understood that
voting was fundamental to their pursuit of freedom and equal opportunity,” says
Lillian Rodríguez López, President of the Hispanic Federation. “Any attempt to
undermine the right to vote, especially when that effort is directed at
historically marginalized groups, must be treated as an attack on the very
ideals that created our country: democracy and equality. And that is why we
stand up for freedom and continue to fight for the right to vote for all
Americans.”

_By John Nichols_

[Read the article at The Nation >][7]

[1]: https://alecexposed.org/wiki/ALEC_Exposed

[2]: https://www.naacp.org/pages/defending-democracy

[3]: https://www.stand4freedom.org/

[4]: https://www.sourcewatch.org/index.php?title=ALEC_Corporations

[5]: https://www.thenation.com/article/161969/rigging-elections

[6]: https://www.thenation.com/article/161973/koch-connection

[7]: https://www.thenation.com/blog/165077/koch-brothers-alec-and-savage-assault-democracy
