---
title: The war in Afghanistan, boot camp, and the Dream Act
contributors: ["contributor/emil-guillermo.md"]

#layout: layouts/post.njk
date: 2012-07-13T13:25:21+00:00


tags:
- Afghanistan
- citizenship
- Dream Act
---

It’s one thing to celebrate patriotism and freedom on July Fourth. But by July
13th, patriotism has all the currency of your fireworks’ spent gunpowder. When
the boom, the beer, and watermelon are gone, for most of us, our Fourth of July
thoughts go back to being taken for granted.

If that’s not the case for you, then chances are you really are a freedom
fighter, or one of their kin.

That’s where I find myself now.

I’ve just returned recently from attending my son-in-law’s graduation from Navy
boot camp. Make no mistake. Boot camp is boot camp. It may be the Navy, but
those aren’t flip-flops. After eight grueling weeks, Luis has become totally
re-oriented. He is now a sailor and a citizen.

That’s right, citizen.

Luis was a green card holder from South America. Becoming a U.S. citizen and a
sailor was his dream. He wants to be a medic for the Navy SEALs.

There is joy certainly about the citizen part. But for me, some inner conflict
too about the other things.

Even though I enjoy watching boxing, and on occasion mixed-martial arts, I do
consider myself somewhat of a pacifist.

I believe in diplomacy before bullets. Tongues-of-fire before bombs. Or
submarines.

I’ve written columns against the war since before the 2001 invasion of
Afghanistan.

Now Luis could be deployed before all combat forces are set to leave by 2014.

I guess this is a version of “loving the sinner, hating the sin,” where one
loves the warrior, but hates the war.

But look where we are with Afghanistan.

As of this week, the Associated Press [reported][1] the death toll had reached
at least 1,900. [][1]

And to what end?  How would the Taliban answer the age-old political question,
“Are you better off today than you were four years ago?” (Only for this make it
11 years, the beginning of the invasion.)

The [Taliban is certainly stronger][2] than before President Obama’s troop
resurgence in 2009.

This is the problem when you fight rebels that won’t quit. You burn out before
they do.

And so we’ve telegraphed our withdrawal date. Reports put our troop presence at
88,000, with about 20,000 scheduled to return by October. Moving people is the
easy part. Getting out all the military gear is expected to cost $100 million a
month in transportation costs. That’s just logistics. No killing involved.

Overall costs of the war remain staggering: $443 billion, according to the
Congressional Research Service.

Still, I want to be supportive of my son-in-law. If you have a voluntary
military, then you want someone like him. He’s young, with a master’s degree.
And a passion for what he believes.

He didn’t enlist to become a citizen. He was already on a path to that. But the
Navy put him in the express lane because he was willing to give his life for his
new country.

If we need soldiers and sailors in our volunteer forces, we need more like Luis.

Which brings me to the Dream Act, a law that would provide the undocumented a
way to become permanent residents given two years at a four-year college or two
years in the military.

Much has been made of the educational component, but before Luis, I really
didn’t give the military part much thought.

In some ways, the military targeting undocumented people to serve is a form of
racial profiling. And it’s not so benign. You’re here illegally, and maybe
you’re not much for education. Fearing deportation, what do you do when a
recruiter comes calling? If he offers you a green card for service, do you make
that deal with the devil?

Such a deal makes for a different kind of mercenary force. Service for green
card.

You go from mowing lawns to mowing Taliban. Human drones.

Do we want that kind of military?

On the other hand, it may not be so bad. Boot camp is intended to weed out the
bad ones. And it appears to be an effective tool–brainwashing through push-ups,
marching, and sleep deprivation.

According to Luis, it’s just weeding out the individual so that the unit works
as a team to fulfill the mission. As his commanders were fond of saying as he
did 100 push-ups, “Destroy yourself.”

Yes, sir.

The military has dangled citizenship in the past to foreign nationals. For
example, Filipinos in the Cavite area of the Philippines have long been a major
source of Navy recruits. But that’s not quite the Dream Act, which uses the
green card as a major recruitment tool.

Given the military aspects, it’s surprising that Republicans still haven’t
mustered the conservative votes to get it passed.

Still, it’s sad to think that the only way the Right can think of to embrace
diversity is by militarizing immigration.

[1]: https://www.washingtonpost.com/national/at-least-1900-us-military-deaths-in-afghanistan-since-2001/2012/07/10/gJQAETiDbW_story.html

[2]: https://www.reuters.com/article/2012/05/06/us-usa-afghanistan-taliban-idUSBRE84509G20120506
