---
title: 'The High-Achiever’s Exit: A Veterans Day observation about our former top vet, soldier, and spy, General Petraeus'
contributors: ["contributor/emil-guillermo.md"]

#layout: layouts/post.njk
date: 2012-11-11T08:15:45+00:00


tags:
- Petraeus
---

Hmmm….Petraeus rhymes with “Betray us”?

I don’t think he did, but it sounds like the mindset of the highly decorated,
super-achieving general who found himself undressed in e-mails.

It’s reported he’s so guilt-ridden for his lack of discretion that he has done
the honorable thing in his mind.

He’s resigned, stepped down, derailed his own high-flying career. He’s fallen on
his sword. Asian warriors would call it hara-kiri, in this case a public
disembowelment.

Not pretty.

Not even necessary. In fact, I don’t know many Asian Americans who take all that
samurai stuff seriously, even as a metaphor.

What, after all, is Petraeus guilty of? The FBI found no national security
breaches in his emails.

They found evidence of an extramarital affair. Didn’t sink a president. Why
should it sink a Petraeus?

It may not say much that the nation’s top spy couldn’t keep this kind of secret.
But hey, not even the Secret Service is capable of keeping that kind of secret.

Still, it’s not like he revealed President Obama’s hotline number or the special
ingredient in Army-grade chili.

Have you thought that maybe after years of having a perfect image, the general
wanted to be caught?

All this episode reveals is the humanity of someone heretofore seen as some kind
of mythic icon of extreme military perfection.

He’s human. Do they give a medal for that?

It’s ironic that it is an affair with a doting biographer, a former West Point
grad and married mother of two, that brings him dishonor. Unlike a lowly
enlisted man, the general didn’t pay for it. But he paid for it.

So here’s the updated resume: Bullets, bombs and Taliban, Petraeus survives.

An affair with an ambitious biographer, a few pay grades higher than a Monica
Lewinsky? Kryptonite.

On a Sunday, the day one usually balances the moral checkbook, I’m inclined to
forgive Petraeus. In the political realm, if there’s no legal breach, then a
moral breach surely rates a pass. Or at least a “Get out of jail free” card. If
the CIA can forgive waterboarding and any number of nefarious things done
covertly, I don’t see why an affair tweaks anybody’s epaulets.

But here is the general’s exit strategy. Petraeus gets to pull some superior
moral one-upmanship on all of us, leaving the scene on the steam vapors of an
affair. That’s the only way an over-achiever can go out, by puzzling us lowly
common folks with such a high-minded exit.

Ah, advantage Petraeus!

I actually find myself wanting more information.

The Petraeus Affair turns out to be like the “The Kardashians” for wonks and
geeks.

It’s revelatory. Hey, nerds have penises and vaginas too.

I guess we were all too deep in thought to care or notice. And we thought he was
too. It’s not a question of good taste. There are just so many high-minded
things of domestic and international importance on the table to wade through in
regards to Petraeus before one has to sink to that human level. We reserve the
right not to think about people like him in\_ that \_way, because he’s Petraeus,
for goodness sakes, not Justin Bieber or Bradley Cooper.

But just give us a whiff of something so out of place, and we all get more
wrapped up with the human than the political. We understand the temptation of an
affair. The x’s and o’s of engagements of the heart. That we all can relate
to–in the public interest.

Benghazi? Not so much.
