---
title: Voter ID Law Blocked By Feds In South Carolina, Texas Could Be Next
authors: []

#layout: layouts/post.njk
date: 2011-12-29T12:56:40+00:00


---

![vote.jpg](/uploads/vote.jpg)

Huffington Post — Last week [the Justice Department blocked a South Carolina law
that would require voters to produce photo identification at the
polls](https://www.huffingtonpost.com/2011/12/23/south-carolina-voter-id-law_n_1168162.html).
Now a similar Texas voter ID law could very well be next to face a legal
challenge. Under the Voting Rights Act, Texas numbers among a few states,
including South Carolina, that must have federal approval of any changes to its
election laws because of its history of racial discrimination.

“[The Texas attorney general’s office is prepared to take all necessary legal
action](https://www.star-telegram.com/2011/12/27/3620522/attorney-general-pledges-to-defend.html)
to defend the voter ID law enacted by the Texas Legislature,” Texas AG
spokeswoman Lauren Bean told the Fort Worth Star-Telegram.

Hilary Shelton, director of the NAACP Washington Bureau and the organization’s
senior vice president for advocacy and policy, said he expects the Texas law to
be blocked as well.

“Our hope is that we see the same thing happening with Texas,” Shelton told The
Huffington Post’s Black Voices on Wednesday afternoon.

“These very nasty, very strong photo ID laws have a desperate impact on racial
minorities and other communities.”

The Texas law is very similar to the South Carolina law, Shelton said, and
because of the requirement placed upon the state to get approval for election
law changes, he believes it is all the more likely that the Justice Department
will block it, as the department did in South Carolina.

“Having the Justice Department come in as an impartial third party and actually
do the kind of analysis that it did, and its thorough assessment of the law and
a thorough investigation into its possible impact; and to come out with what it
did says an awful lot,” Shelton said.

The Justice Department’s decision was a rare victory for those fighting to stop
what has been described as an effort to suppress turnout among minority voters
and other groups that have historically supported Democrats. But the
government’s intervention in South Carolina may also serve as a goad to those
who support such laws. Proponents of voter ID laws say the measures are needed
to protect against voter fraud. Both sides seem poised for a prolonged legal
fight, with South Carolina as the first battleground. South Carolina Attorney
General Alan Wilson has vowed to take the case to federal court, if need be.

Gov. Nikki Haley denounced the decision as an act of political “bullying”. “It
is outrageous,” [she said in reported
statements](https://www.nytimes.com/2011/12/24/us/justice-department-rejects-voter-id-law-in-south-carolina.html).
“We plan to look at every possible option to get this terrible, clearly
political decision overturned.”

More than a dozen states have passed tough new voting restriction laws this
year. Eight of those states, including Alabama, Kansas, Mississippi, Rhode
Island, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas and Wisconsin, require photo
identification. A handful of these laws — including the Texas law signed this
summer by Gov. Rick Perry — are scheduled to go into effect on Jan. 1.

In Texas, voters can present a gun permit but not college-issued identification.
The fight thus far has split along partisan lines, the debate tinged with
elements of age, race and class. According to Democrats, about 25 percent of
African Americans and 19 percent of Latinos do not have any form of
government-issued identification. And the poor and many older Americans, reports
suggest, are less able to pay various fees connected with acquiring the
identification that would be required under many of the new laws.

A number of minority and labor groups, including the NAACP, the United
Federation of Teachers, the health care workers’ union 1199SEIU, the National
Council of La Raza, the Asian-American Legal Defense Fund and others have
[joined forces and continue to hold protests and rallies around the
country.](https://www.huffingtonpost.com/2011/12/01/voter-id-laws-assault-on-_n_1123445.html)

[Read the rest of the article at the Huffington Post >][1]

_By Trymaine Lee_

[1]: https://www.huffingtonpost.com/2011/12/28/voter-id-law-blocked-by-f_n_1173184.html
